[[page:1]]
1 
 
MAKERERE    UNIVERSITY 
 
 
ACADEMIC REGISTRAR’S DEPARTMENT 
MAY 2015 EDITION 
RULES ON EXAMINATION MALPRACTICES AND IRREGULARITIES 
(AMENDED BY THE SPECIAL SENATE ON 13TH NOVEMBER, 2014 AND 
APPROVED BY THE 135TH MEETING OF COUNCIL) 
 
Rule 1: Malpractices in Relation to Coursework 
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate to avail to another student/candidate his/her 
prepared coursework with a view to assisting the latter to do his/her coursework or to negligently 
expose his/her coursework to another candidate to use. 
 
Penalty 
Any student/candidate found guilty of the offence under Rule. 1 above shall be liable to:  
i) Caution and Cancellation of his/her coursework, or  
ii) Caution and Cancellation of his/her coursework and suspension from his/her studies for a 
period not exceeding one academic year. 
 
Rule 2: Fraud in Relation to Coursework 
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate to: 
(a) Submit coursework not prepared by him/her. 
(b) Substantially plagiarise the work of any other person. 
(c) Solicit/purchase any coursework from any other person. 
(d) Falsify/alter marks awarded on a coursework script. 
 
Penalty 
Any student/candidate found guilty of involvement in fraudulent conduct related to coursework 
as set out in Rule. 2 above shall be liable to:  
i) Caution and Cancellation of his/her coursework, or  
ii) Cancellation of his/her coursework and suspension from his/her studies for a period not 
exceeding one academic year, or  
iii) Cancellation of his/her coursework and dismissal from the University. 
 
Rule 3: Malpractices in the Conduct of Examinations 
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate involved in an examination/test to:
[[page:2]]
2 
 
(a) Sit or attempt to sit the examination without valid documentation. 
(b) Enter the examination hall/room later than half an hour after the examination/test has 
commenced. 
(c) Leave the examination hall/room earlier than half an hour after the examination has 
commenced except in emergencies with the express permission of the Invigilator. 
(d) Carry out a conversation or any other comm unication with another student/candidate once 
the examination has commenced. 
(e) Indulge in any disruptive conduct including, but not limited to, shouting, assault of another 
student/candidate, using abusive and /or threatening language, destruction of uni versity 
property or the property of another student/candidate. 
(f) Take out of the examination room/hall answer booklet(s), used or unused. 
(g) Neglect, omit or in any other way fail to follow lawful instructions or orders issued by the 
Invigilator. 
(h)  Physically assault or insult an Invigilator or any University Official involved in the conduct 
of the examination. 
 
Penalty 
Any student/candidate found guilty of contravening Rule 3 above, shall be liable to:  
(i) Caution and Cancellation of the relevant examination, or   
ii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension from the University for a period 
not exceeding two years, or   
iii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and dismissal from the University.   
iv) A student/candidate who contra venes Rule 3(e) shall be liable to a fine as well as any 
penalty specified above.  
(v) A Government -sponsored student/candidate found guilty of contravening Rule 3. above, 
may have the Government sponsorship cancelled besides any other punishment taking in to 
account the gravity of the offence except in cases where the student/candidate is dismissed 
from the University. 
(vi) Any student/candidate found guilty of contravening Rule 3(h) above by physically 
assaulting an Invigilator or a University Official shall be dismissed from the University.   
 
Rule 4: Cheating in an Examination 
It shall be an offence for any student/candidate involved in an examination to: 
(a) Take into the examination room/hall, in person or by agent, unauthorized materials 
including, but  not limited to, plain papers, condensed/summarized notes, books, and 
handkerchiefs on which information is written or information written on any part of the 
body, recording apparatus, mobile phones or any unauthorized electronic equipment.   
(b) Copy from any other candidate/student.
[[page:3]]
3 
 
(c) Involve oneself in plagiarism, that is: 
(i) Pass off the words or ideas of someone else as his/her own without proper 
acknowledgement or crediting the original source. 
(ii) Replicate one’s own work which one has presented elsewhere for assessment. 
(d) Aid and/ or abet another candidate/student to copy from a script/ book of another person. 
(e) Exchange answers with another candidate/student in or outside the examination room. 
(f) Collaborate with another candidate/student in the examination room to use telephone 
discussions and share material including calculators and other electronic equipment. 
 
Penalty 
Any student/candidate found guilty of cheating in examinations as defined above shall be liable 
to:  
i) Caution and Cancellation of the relevant examination, or   
ii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension from the University for a period 
not exceeding two years, or   
iii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and dismissal from the University.   
(iv) A Government-sponsored student/candidate found guilty of contravening Rule 4 above, may 
have the Government sponsorship cancelled besides any other punishment except in cases 
where the student/candidate is dismissed from the University. 
(v) Any student/candidate found guilty of cheating in examinations on second conviction shall 
be dismissed from the University. 
(vi) On conclusion of the malpractice case, the confiscated unauthorized material shall be 
destroyed within sixty (60) days from the date of the letter communicating the decision.  
(vii) Where several paragraphs or ideas have been plagiarized the student shall be warned and 
awarded a grade “D” for the submitted work. 
(viii) On a second charge of the offence of plagiarism as defined in (a) above, the ex amination 
shall be cancelled and the student awarded a grade “F” for the submitted work. 
(ix) On a third and subsequent time of the offence of plagiarism as defined in (a) above, the 
student shall be suspended for a year. 
(x) Where the entire material has been lifted from another source verbatim or with only slight 
alterations the student shall be dismissed from the University. 
 
 
Rule 5: Fraud in Examinations and Examination Results  (As amended by Senate 
on 13th November, 2014) 
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate involved in an examination to: 
 
Section (a) Import into the examination hall/room, in person or by an agent, a pre -
prepared answer script/booklet;
[[page:4]]
4 
 
Section (b) Substitute an answer script/booklet prepared outside the examination 
room/hall for the one already submitted to the Invigilator/Examiner; 
 
Section (c) Falsify or altering marks awarded on an examination script/book; after  
course work; Viva voce/Public defense or final board of examiners’ 
meeting; testimonial, field work report or t o procure someone to alter 
marks awarded on an examination script/book or c ourse work or 
assessment record; 
 
Section (d) Impersonate another student/candidate; 
 
Section (e) Procure or induce another person to sit for him/her; 
 
Section (f) Utter false docum ents in relation to eligibility to sit University 
examinations, including but not limited to; examination permit, financial 
statement, bank slip and registration card; 
 
Section (g) Sit or attempt to sit an examination without authority; 
 
Section (h) Deliver to the examiner’s office or residence an examination 
script/booklet outside the scheduled time for delivery without due 
authority; 
 
Section (i) fraudulently receive examination papers/questions which have been 
illegally procured or made available; 
 
Section (j) Fraudulently access or attempt to access examination questions before the 
examination is due; 
 
Section (k) Pay or induce another person to illegally procure or make available 
examination questions/papers. 
 
Section (l) Pay or procure a member of staff or non-member of staff to alter 
examination results 
 
Section (m) Student(s) writing false information on the answer booklet with  
 Intention to hide his/her identity. 
 
Section (n) Student(s) smuggling/attempting to smuggle examination booklet out of 
the examination venue having signed the register and later claiming that 
his/her marks are missing
[[page:5]]
5 
 
Section (o) Student(s) unlawfully retrieving examination materials from University 
custody for purposes of falsifying results/marks. 
 
 
 
Penalty for Rule No. 5 
Any student/candidate found guilty of fraudulent conduct as defined above shall be 
liable to: 
 
 (i) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension from the  
University for a period not exceeding two Academic Years; or 
 
(ii) Cancellation of the rele vant examinations and dismissal from the 
University; 
 
(iii) A government sponsored student/any other University related sponsored  
student found guilty of contravening Rule 5 is liable to cancellation of the 
sponsorship; 
 
(iv) If a member of staff is procu red to alter examination results, he/she 
should be handed over to the Disciplinary Committee; 
 
 (v) If the person procured is not a member of staff, he/she should be handed  
over to police.  
 
 
Rule 6   Offences Relating to the Conduct of Irregularities Hearing 
It shall be an offence for any student/candidate whether or not he /she has been accused of an 
irregularity to: 
a) Interfere with the conduct of investigations into the matter or the hearing of an irregularity 
by the Faculty Appeals and Irregularities Committee. 
b) Intimidate members of the Committee or other members of the University Staff or witnesses 
in the irregularity matter. 
c) Destroy evidence relating to an alleged irregularity.   
d) Forge or utter false documents in relation to an alleged irregularity.   
e) Bribe or attempt to bribe a University Official witness or any other person in relation to an 
alleged irregularity. 
f) Harass or procure others to harass on his /her behalf a University official, witnesses or any 
other person in relation to an irregularity by making constant telephone calls, visits, etc. 
 
Penalty
[[page:6]]
6 
 
Any student/candidate found guilty of interference with the conduct of an irregularity hearing as 
defined in Rule 6 above shall be liable to: 
i) Cancellation of the relevant examinations, or 
ii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and suspension from the University for a period 
not exceeding one academic year, or  
iii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and dismissal from the University. 
 
Rule 6 A Possessions of Firearms during the examination period 
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate involved in an examination/test to: 
(a) Bring within the precincts of the examination room any firearm or potentially dangerous 
weapon. 
(b) Use a firearm or any potentially danger ous weapon with the purpose to intimidate, threaten 
or otherwise deter investigations into any examination irregularity. 
 
Penalty 
Any student found guilty of the offence defined in Rule 6A(a) shall be liable to: 
i) Caution and cancellation of the relevant examination, or 
ii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension for a period not exceeding two 
years, or 
iii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and dismissal from the University. 
NOTE: The term “ potentially lethal weapon ” for purposes of  Rule 6A includes, but is 
not limited to, pangas, machetes, daggers, switch blades, spears, swords, bows & 
arrows, brass knuckles and any incendiary device.  This definition also includes 
imitations of potentially dangerous weapons such as fake guns.   
Rule 7 Mitigating and Aggravating Factors When Determining the Appropriate 
Punishment   
Where the Rule provides a range of punishments, the Committee may take into account the 
following mitigating and aggravating factors in determining the appropriate punishment. 
 
(a) Mitigating Factors. 
 Remorse on the part of the student/candidate. 
 Truthfulness 
 Lack of substantial benefit from the malpractice 
 Student/candidate first offender 
 Plea of guilty therefore not wasting the Committee’s time. 
(b) Aggravating Factors. 
 Substantial benefit from the malpractice. 
 Lack of credibility.
[[page:7]]
7 
 
 General misconduct. 
 Frivolous and vexatious denials. 
  Allegations of misconduct on the part of University staff which are subsequently 
proved to be false. 
 Second conviction. 
 
Rule 8: Procedure for Hearing of Malpractice Cases. 
 
(i) Guidelines on Apprehension of a Suspect 
1. When a student/candidate is suspected to be engaging in examination malpractices, he/she 
should be apprehended immediately. In the apprehension of a susp ect, the following should 
be taken into account: 
a. A suspect should be handled in the appropriate manner to ensure that the privacy and 
bodily integrity of a person is not violated. Body searches should be done in the 
presence of another person. 
b. The materials should be taken away as soon as they are found and kept as exhibits. 
c. Identity of the suspect and possible witnesses should be recorded immediately. 
d. A suspect should be allowed to proceed with the examination since he/she is presumed 
to be innocent until proved guilty. 
 
(ii) Rules of Natural Justice 
2. In the handling of examination irregulariti es and malpractices, the Colleges /School/Institute 
Committee shall take into account the following principles of natural justice: 
(a) Fair and equal treatment of all students/candidates, 
(b) The opportunity to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty, 
(c) Fair hearing accorded to all students/candidates, 
(d) Right of students/candidates to appear and to defend themselves, 
e. Staff not to sit in judgment of their own cause, and 
f. Consistency in punishments. 
 
(iii) Pre- Hearing 
3. The Member of Staff who alleges that a student/candidate was involved in a malpractice 
shall make a formal written report to the Chairperson of the School Committee. Any 
materials allegedly found on the student/candidate should be given to the Chairperson for 
safe custody. 
4. The Chairperson of the Committee shall inform the student/candidate in writing of the 
allegation. A copy of the Rules shall be availed to the student/candidate with the letter of the 
Chairperson.
[[page:8]]
8 
 
5. The student/candidate shall be allowed to make a formal defence to the allegations in 
writing addressed to the Chairperson of the   Committee. 
6. The student/candidate shall then be invited in writing or by whatever exp edient method to 
appear before the Committee to defend himself/herself. 
7. The student/candidate shall be given adequate notice of the date  of appearing before the 
College/School/Institute Committee to enable him/her time to prepare his/her defence. 
8.  (a) A student/candidate who fails or refuses or omits to appear after being effectively 
summoned three times shall be suspended indefinitely from the University pending 
his/her appearance before the Committee. 
(b) The suspension shall remain in place until t he Chairperson of the Committee formally 
notifies the Academic Registrar that the student/candidate has appeared and answered 
the allegations. 
c) A student/candidate alleged to have been involved in examination malpractice shall not 
be registered until such a time that the case has been disposed of. 
 
iv) Hearing 
9. The College Examinations Committee shall appoint the Appeals and Examinations 
Irregularities Committee. The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee 
shall be  constituted by the C hairperson and six other members. The membership of the 
Committee shall be drawn fro m the  Deans/Directors and Chairs of Departments in each 
School/Institute. Quorum of the Committee shall be five members present. 
(Note: (a) The membership and quorum shoul d be determined in such a way as to ensure 
that members do not sit in judgement of their own cases.)  
 (b) The Board of Studies in each Faculty/School/Institute should determi ne the 
membership of the School/Institute Appeals and Irregularities Committee.) 
10. The student/candidate shall appear in person before the Committee and identify 
himself/herself as the subject of the proceedings. The Member of Staff /Invigilator 
concerned should also be present. 
11. The Committee shall formally charge the student/can didate. The student/candidate shall be 
informed by the prosecutor of the allegations against him/her and the Rule in the Rules on 
Examination Malpractices and Irregularities he/she is alleged to have breached. In addition, 
he/she shall be informed of the possible punishments. 
12. The student/candidate shall formally respond to such allegations. 
13. When the student/candidate responds in the affirmative, a plea of guilty shall be recorded by 
the prosecutor. 
(a) On a plea of guilty, the Member of Staff/Invigi lator reporting the malpractice shall 
present the facts constituting the malpractice to the Committee in the presence of the 
student/candidate.
[[page:9]]
9 
 
(b) Where the student/candidate is alleged to have been found with unauthorised materials, 
the materials shall b e brought before the Committee and the Member of Staff making 
the report shall state formally in the presence of the student/candidate whether they are 
the materials he/she is alleged to have found in the possession of the student/candidate. 
(c) The student/candidate shall be given an opportunity to respond to allegations of fact. 
He/she may disagree with them and he/she has a right to cross -examine the person 
making the report. 
(d) Where the student/candidate responds to the allegations of facts and the Co mmittee is 
of the considered opinion that in substance he/she is pleading not guilty, it shall direct 
that a plea of not guilty be substituted for the plea of guilty.  
NB: Where the student/candidate admits the offence with an explanation or makes a 
plea that is vague the Committee should record a plea of not guilty).   
(e) The student/candidate shall be allowed to plead mitigating factors, which the 
Committee should take into account in prescribing punishment. 
(f) The Committee shall then deliberate in the  absence of the student/candidate and the 
Member of Staff/Invigilator making the report. 
(g) A decision shall be made with regard to the punishment and reasons should be assigned 
for such a decision.  
(h) The report shall be forwarded to the College  Examinations Committee for information 
for any other decisions apart from dismissal.  Where, on th e face of the record, the 
College Examinations Committee realises that the School/Institute Committee erred in 
its decisions, the College Examinations Committee has a right to review the decision. 
 
14. On a plea of not guilty by the student/candidate, the Member of Staff/Invigilator making the 
report shall present the facts to the Committee with the guidance of the prosecutor in the 
presence of the student/candidate who has a right of cross-examination. 
(a) The Member of Staff/Invigilator reporting the malpractice shall present the facts 
constituting the malpractice to the Committee in the presence of the student/candidate. 
(b) Where the student/candidate is alleged t o have been found with unauthorised materials, 
the materials shall be brought before the Committee and the Member of Staff making 
the report shall state formally in the presence of the student/candidate whether they are 
the materials he/she is alleged to have found in the possession of the student/candidate. 
(c) The student/candidate shall be given an opportunity to respond to allegations of fact. 
He/she may disagree with them and he/she has a right to cross -examine the person 
making the report. 
 
15. The prosecutor may call witnesses whose presence he/she considers important for the just 
and fair disposal of the case.
[[page:10]]
10 
 
16. The student/candidate shall present his/her defence to the Committee in the presence of the 
Member of Staff who made the report who also has a right of cross-examination. 
 
17. The student/candidate may call witnesses to substantiate his/her defence. 
 
v) Nature of Evidence General 
18.  (a) The Committee may admit oral and material evidence, which may be direct or 
circumstantial. 
(Note: direct evidence is the account of the eyewitnesses or the original 
documents while circumstantial evidence is that which is inferred from the 
circumstances of the case e.g. the student/candidate running away when 
approached by an Invigilator.) 
(b) The Committee may not admit hearsay evidence unless there is independent evidence 
that lends it credence. 
(Note: hearsay evidence is indirect in the sense that it is given by a person who 
was not an eye witness e.g. where a witness reports what was told to her/him by 
another person or photocopies of documents produced where the original is not 
produced with no adequate explanation as to why. Such evidence should only be 
accepted where there is other direct evidence which supports the hearsay.) 
19. After the close of the evidence and before a decision is made, the student/candidate shall be 
given an opportunity to present to the Committee mitigating factors. 
 
 
vi)   Post-Hearing 
20. The School Committee shall deliberate on the matter preferably on the same day as the 
hearing. 
 
21. The School Committee shall make findings of fact with respect to the evidence and make a 
decision based on those facts. The School Committee must assign reasons for each decision. 
 
22. The proceedings, School Committee deliberations and the decision/ recommendation should 
be recorded and a signed record shoul d be forwarded to the College  Examinations 
Committee for information for decisions other than dismissal.   
 
23. The student/candidate shall be officially informed of such decision and availed a copy of the 
decision as well as the record of the proceedings. 
 
24. The student/candidate shall be informed of his/her right of appeal and the procedure to be 
followed.
[[page:11]]
11 
 
 
25. Where the School Committee recommends dismissal of a student/candidate, the de cision 
must be confirmed by the College Academic Board  and then the student/candidate shall be 
officially informed of the final decision. 
26.  A student/candidate  who has been recommended for suspension/discontinuation/dismissal 
ceases to be a bona fide student and shall not be accorded any services. He/she shall not be a 
provisional student ; however, he/she has recourse to appeal to the College Appeals and 
Irregularities Committee  provided he/she lodges his/her appeal after leaving the 
School/Institute on receipt of the communication. 
 
 
vii) Appeal Procedures 
 
27. A student/candidate who is dissatisfied with the decision of a School Committee may appeal 
to the College Appeals and  Examinations Irregularities Committee within 30 days from the 
date of the lett er communicating the decision.  An Appeal shall only be  accepted when the 
concerned student is no longer at the School/Institute.   
 
28. The appeal shall be in w riting addressed to the College  Registrar and copied to the 
School/Institute Committee stating c learly th e grounds of appeal. The College  Registrar 
shall acknowledge in writing to the student/candi date and Chairperson of School/Institute 
Committee receipt of the appeal. 
 
29. A student/candidate who pleaded guilty to an offence before the School/Institute Committee 
shall have a right of appeal only with respect to the penalty. 
 
30. The College Appeals and  Examinations Irregularities Committee shall hear the appeal 
expeditiously. The student/candidate appealing shall be notified in writing of the date w hen 
the appeal will be heard and should be given an opportunity to appear befo re the College  
Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee and be heard. 
 
31. The College Registrar shall officially notify the School/Institute Committee that made the 
decision in the first instance of the date of hea ring of the appeal. The School/Institute 
Committee shall have a right of representation. 
 
32. At the hearing of the appeal, the student/candidate shall have an opportun ity to be heard and 
the School/Institute C ommittee shall have a right to respond to the student/candidate’s 
presentation.
[[page:12]]
12 
 
33. The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee shall have power on cause 
being shown to allow the student/candidate present additional evidence before it. 
 
34. Where additional witnesses are called, they will be subject to cross -examination by th e 
representative of the School/Institute Committee. The Faculty/School/Institute Committee 
may also adduce additional evidence, which may be responded to by the student/candidate. 
 
35. The College Appeals and  Examinations Irregularities Committee will then deliberate in the 
absence of the student/candidate and School/Institute Committee representative preferably 
on the date of hearing. 
 
36. The College Appeals and  Examinations Irregularities Committee may confirm, vary or set 
aside the decision of the School/Institute Committee. 
 
37. The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee shall take into account the 
rules of natural justice set out in Rule 8(ii) 2 of these Rules. 
 
38. A student/candidate who is diss atisfied with the decision of the College Appeals and 
Examination Irregularities Committee may appeal to the  higher and final Senate Academic 
Policies and Appeals Committee within 30 days from the date o f the letter communicating 
the decision. The decision of Academic Policies and Appeals Committee shall be final. 
 
GENERAL RULE FOR POSSESSION OF FIREARMS  
 
It shall be an offence for any student to: 
a) Be in possession of firearms or other potentially leth al weapons on university property and 
halls of residence.   
b) Use a firearm or any potentially lethal weapon on university property and halls of residence.   
c) Appear on university property or halls of residence wearing a law enforcement security 
uniform.   
 
Penalty 
iv) Caution, or 
v) Suspension for a period not exceeding two academic years, or 
vi) Dismissal from the University without prejudice to any action that may be pursued in a 
court of law.
[[page:13]]
13 
 
Policy on Academic Appeals 
  
1. Precepts and General Principles 
a) Students will have full opportunity to raise individually or collectively matters of 
proper concern to them without fear of disadvantage and in the knowledge that privacy 
and confidentiality will be respected. 
b) The rights of staff members and  students should be taken into account and protected 
when handling appeals. That there should be policy on protection of information/data 
regarding appeals. 
c) The Academic Appeals procedure form a part of the institutions overall framework for 
quality assurance. There structures to handle students appeals at every School/Institute. 
There should be staff student’s liaison system/official at every faculty/school/institute. 
The Dean of students, the health services, academic units should be part of the 
academic support system for appeals. 
d) The University will ensure that its procedures are fair and that the decisions made are 
reasonable and have regard to any applicable law. 
e) The University will address student complaints and appeals in a timely manner, us ing 
simple and transparent procedures. Informal resolution should be an option at all stages 
of the complaints procedure which should operate, in the first instance at the level at 
which the matter arose. 
f) Information on complaints and appeals procedures  will be published, accurate, 
complete, clearly presented, readily accessible and issued to students and staff. 
g) Sources of impartial help, advice, guidance, and support will be advertised widely 
within the university. 
h) The complaints and appeals proce dures should identify the persons or bodies from 
whom authoritative guidance may be sought on the applicability and operation of the 
procedures. 
i) Those responding to investigating or adjudicating upon complaints or appeals must do 
so impartially and must  not act in any matter in which they have a material interest or 
in which any potential conflict of interest  might arise. 
j) A complaint or appellant should be entitled to be accompanied at all stages of the 
complaints or appeals process by a person of his her choosing. 
k) The documentation should indicate what further internal procedures, if any, are open to 
a student dissatisfied with the response to a complaint or outcome of an appeal. 
l) The University will ensure that where a complaint or appeal is up held appropriate 
remedial action is implemented. 
m) The University will have in place effective arrangements for the regular monitoring 
evaluation, and review of complaints and appeals.
[[page:14]]
14 
 
n) That academic appeals system should be viewed as mediating arbitra tion, monitoring 
process which should go beyond handling the current examination malpractice. 
o) The University will keep their monitoring, evaluation and review arrangements under 
scrutiny, taking into account good practice. That there should be tools or instruments 
for collecting complaints from students. 
 
2. Scope of the Academic Appeals and Complaints System  
That the mechanism to handle appeals be categorised as follows; 
a) Staff - Student relations 
b) Teaching supervision and delivery 
c) Assessment 
d) Procedures of appeals/complaints 
e) Protection of due process 
f) Sanctions 
g) Rewards 
h) Monitoring 
 
If a student has reason to believe that an academic decision reached by the University is incorrect 
one has in some way been based on incorrect or partial  information, a student has a right to 
appeal against that decision without fear of reprisal or victimization. The university to deal with 
an academic appeal seriously, impartially, within in a reasonable timescale and as appropriate, in 
confidence. 
 
3. Academic Appeals 
The University’s general Regulations prescribe two sorts of circumstances in which, or good 
reason, you may appeal against an academic decision of the University. 
 
(a) Those in which the University suspends or terminates your registration on  the 
recommendation of your Board of Studies.  This may results from examination failure or 
because a students academic progress is considered unsatisfactory (e.g. failure to attend 
classes or to submit work for assessment). 
(b) Those in which the universi ty awards what a student believes is incorrect class or category 
of degree or other qualification or decides that a student may have not fully satisfied the 
academic and/or professional requirements for an award.  
 
4  Grounds for Appeal 
These are the groun ds on which the University will consider an appeal against an academic 
decision;
[[page:15]]
15 
 
(a) That in reaching it decision the university was unaware of factors which had affected your 
performance (e.g. family or personal circumstances or ill health), which for val id reasons 
you had been unable to known earlier. 
(b) That there had been mathematical or procedural error in recording or calculating the marks 
on which a decision was based. 
(c) That there had been irregularities or administrative errors in the conduct of  an examination 
or other form(s) of assessment of such a nature as to cause reasonable about the examiners 
decision. 
(d) That you have reason to believe that one or more of the examiners was prejudice or biased. 
 
The University will not consider appeals on grounds other than the above, particularly;    
(a) Those made against the academic judgment, properly exercised, or duly appointed 
examiners, including external examiners. 
(b) Those made mischievously or frivolously without justifiable ground. 
(c) Those m ade on the basis of alleged insufficiencies in teaching or supervision or the 
provision of materials or equipment. 
(d) Those based on ill-health or other circumstances which could and should have been reported 
to the school at the time of their occurrence 
(e) Where the general regulations preclude appeals in circumstances in which a student has 
been allowed to be addressed or to re-present a dissertation or thesis. 
 
5. Procedures for Appeals  
a) If a student decides to submit an appeal against an academic d ecision of the university, 
he/she should do so within 30 days of formal publication or otherwise receiving notification 
of the results. 
b) The appeal should be addressed to the Dean of students, setting out in writing the specific 
grounds on which   the ap peal is being made. The Dean of student’s office will treat any 
personal information which is received in the course of dealing with students appeal as 
confidential. Such information will be kept, used and shared where necessary and 
appropriate with other members of university staff, only for the purposes of investigating 
and determining the outcome of your appeal. 
c) If you require advice on whether you have proper grounds for an appeal or if you need help 
to present the grounds of the appeal, you can seek assistance from the students guild or from 
the Dean of Students. 
d) In the first instance, the Dean of students will normally refer your appeal to the head of the 
academic unit for comment and for any further information required to enable it to be 
considered. On receiving the School /Institute response, the Dean of students will consult 
where appropriate with the Academic Registrar and the Deputy-Vice Chancellor to establish 
whether there are grounds for appeal.
[[page:16]]
16 
 
e) If it is decided that the ground for appe al do not accord with those prescribed in the general 
regulations, the Dean of students will inform the student that decision and the reasons in 
writing usually  within 15 working days of receiving the initial appeal. The appeal will be 
dismissed and no further action will be taken. 
f) If it is decided that the grounds for appeal do accord with those prescribed in the general 
regulations, the Dean of students will take one of the following courses of action, depending 
on the grounds of the appeal; 
g) In the  case of an appeal involving a mathematical or procedural error in calculating your 
eligibility for an award, he/she will ordinarily consult with the chair of the Board of 
Examiners. If an error is found then the examiners decision will be amended if appro priate, 
including the pre-classification of an award. 
h) In the case of an appeal involving irregularities in the assessment process, circumstances 
which had not been known at the time a decision was made or allegations of bias, the matter 
is referred to Appeals Committee.  
i) A student who is diss atisfied with the decision of College Appeals and Examinations 
Irregularities Committee may appeal to the Senate Academic Policies and Appeals 
Committee within 30 days from the date of the letter communicating the decision. 
j) The appeal shall be in writing addressed to the Academ ic Registrar and copied to the 
College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities  Committee stating clearly the grounds of 
appeal. The Academic Registrar shall acknowledge in writing to the s tudent and 
Chairperson of College Committee receipt of the appeal. 
k) A student who pleaded guilty to an offence before the College/School/Institute Committee 
shall have a right of appeal only with respect to the penalty. 
l) The Senate Appeals Committee sh all hear the appeal expeditiously. The student appealing 
shall be notified in writing of the date when the appeal will be heard and should be given an 
opportunity to appear before the Senate Appeals Committee and be heard. 
m) The Academic Registrar shall officially notify the School Committee that made the decision 
in the first instance of the date of hea ring of the appeal. The School/Institute Committee 
shall have a right of representation. 
n) At the hearing of the appeal, the student shall have an opportu nity to be heard and  the 
School/Institute Committee shall have a right to respond to the student’s presentation. 
o) The Senate Appeals Committee shall have power on cause being shown to allow the student 
present additional evidence before it. 
p) Where addi tional witnesses are called they will be subject to cross -examination by th e 
representative of the School/Institute Committee. The School/Institute Committee may also 
adduce additional evidence, which may be responded to by the student. 
q) The Senate Academic Policies and Appeals Committee will then deliberate in the absence of 
the student and School/Institute Committee representative preferably on the date of hearing.
[[page:17]]
17 
 
r) The Senate Appeals Committee may confirm, vary or set a side the decision of the Colleg e 
Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee. 
s) The Senate Academic Policies and Appeals Committee shall take into account the rules of 
natural justice.  
 
6. The College Appeals Committee 
a) The Appeals Committee is composed of members who will not  have been directly involved 
in the universities original decision.  
b) It will include student members. 
c) The Appeals Committee has authority to determine the way in which it will consider the 
appeal before it. 
 
7. Code of Practice 
a) A student appealing  and other parties involved in the appeal, have access, prior to the 
meeting of the committee, relevant papers, including written commentaries on the appeal 
and responses to the appeal. 
b) A student applying will be given adequate notice of the date, time and venue for the meeting 
and also be invited to attend. 
c) The appellant is entitled to be accompanied by “a friend” of his/her choosing during the 
hearing. 
d) The appellant shall be informed in writing of the result of the appeal within 10 working days 
of the meeting. In case of delay due to need for further investigation notification   should be 
given.  
e) Staff not to sit in judgment of their own cause