[[page:1]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY ACADEMIC 
POLICIES MANUAL
2025
[[page:2]]

[[page:3]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Preface To The Makerere University Academic Policies 
Manual 1
Introductory Information 2
Revised General Admission Requirements For 
Undergraduate Programmes 12
International Students 60
The Short-Term Studentship Scheme 66
The Occasional Studentship Scheme 63
Makerere University Fees Policy 65
General Admission Requirements To Graduate 
Programmes 67
Guidelines For Graduate Programme Plans 82
Revised Regulations And Guidelines For Operations Of 
The Semester/Credit Unit System For Undergraduate 
Programmes
85
Revised General Academic And Examinations 
Regulations 97
Policy On Appeals By Students 120
Roles And Responsibilities For External Examiners 121
Teaching And Learning Policy 141
Guidelines For Field Attachment 146
Guidelines For Graduation  Ceremonies 156
A Statute On Honorary Awards Guidelines 161
Policy On Joint Awards Between Makerere University 
And Other Institution
163
Statute For The Governance Of Makerere University 
Degrees And Other Awards At Affiliated Institutions
166
CONTENTS
[[page:4]]

[[page:5]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
1
PREFACE TO THE MAKERERE UNIVERSITY 
ACADEMIC POLICIES MANUAL
The Makerere University Academic Policies Manual is produced by the Department 
of the Academic Registrar. The information presented in this book reflects all the 
significant changes which have taken place in the University since the 5th edition 
of the University Prospectus beginning of the 2010/2011 academic year. This 
Manual is specifically for academic policies and there will be two separate hand 
books for Undergraduate and Graduate academic programmes.
The University transitioned from the faculty-based to the collegiate system on 
1st July 2011 and as of Friday 30th December 2011, Makerere University officially 
transformed into a Collegiate University with 9 Constituent Colleges and as at 1st 
July 2014, 10 Constituent Colleges including the School of Law, all operating as 
semi-autonomous units of the University.
Makerere University is governed by The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions 
Act (2001) as amended, and the Management of Constituent Colleges Statute 
2012.
During the compilation of this manual a lot of care has been taken but the 
University is not legally responsible for any errors or any omissions there within. 
The University also categorically states that Makerere University accepts no 
responsibility in the event that a student’s class of award or course of instruction 
is either cancelled or not completed as a result of strikes, lockouts, fire, tempest or 
acts of God or any other cause beyond the control of the University.
It is also important to note that all material in this Manual is subject to change 
without notice although changes are normally published by incorporation in the 
next edition. The University reserves the right to change or amend its programmes, 
fees structure and regulations at any time from those published in the prospectus. 
The Academic Registrar’s Department acknowledges the efforts and cooperation 
of all the individuals who have provided information and those who have worked 
on this Makerere University Academic Policies Manual
WE BUILD FOR THE FUTURE.
Prof. Buyinza Mukadasi
ACADEMIC REGISTRAR
[[page:6]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
2
INTRODUCTORY INFORMATION
1.0  BRIEF HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Makerere University was first established in 1922 as a Technical School. In January 
of that year, the school, later re-named Uganda Technical College, opened its doors 
to 14-day students who began studying Carpentry, Building and Mechanics. The 
College soon began offering various other courses in Medical Care, Agriculture, 
Veterinary Sciences and Teacher Training. In 1937, the College started developing 
into an institution of higher education, offering post - school certificate courses. In 
1949, it became a University College in special relationship with the University of 
London. It soon became a College for the whole of Eastern Africa, offering courses 
leading to General Degrees of the University of London. With the establishment of 
the University of East Africa on 29th June, 1963, the period of special relationship 
with the University of London came to a close and Degrees of the University of 
East Africa were instituted. On 1st July, 1970, Makerere became an independent 
National University of the Republic of Uganda, offering undergraduate and 
postgraduate courses leading to its own awards.
Makerere University transitioned from the Faculty-based to the Collegiate system. 
Presently, Makerere University is officially comprised of ten (10) Constituent 
Colleges including the School of Law. All these Colleges operate as semi- 
autonomous Units of the University.
2.0
Makerere University is a thought leader of 
knowledge generation for societal transformation 
and development
3.0
Makerere University is committed to providing 
transformative and innovative teaching, learning, 
research and services responsive to dynamic 
national and global needs.
4.0
Makerere University in the pursuit of its mission 
will be guided by the following core values:
1.     Excellence
2.     Accountability
3.     Professionalism
4.     Integrity
5.     Respect and Inclusivity
[[page:7]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
3
5.0  THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Makerere University is governed by the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions 
Act 2001(As amended). The University is also goverened by the Universities and 
Other Tertiary Institutions (Management of Constituent Colleges of Makerere 
University) Statute 2012 which provides for the creation of Constituent Colleges. 
The Statute defines the power relationships between the main University 
Adminstration Organs and the Colleges; and the relations between the Colleges 
and its constituent units. The process for developing a legal framework for the 
collegiate model was carried out based on the review of the University Statutes 
governing Constituent Colleges.
This Academic Policies Manual comprises all academic policies governing 
students’ academic life in the University at all stages from admission, registration, 
teaching and learning, examination, and graduation. These Academic policies are 
formulated by the University Senate and are approved by the University Council.
Policies and procedures are living documents that are developed, adapted and re-
viewed in compliance with the needs of the organisation. While the core elements 
of policy may remain the same, some details change with the influence of time 
and trends of the organization. 
6.0  UNIVERSITY ACADEMIC ORGANS
6.1 THE SENATE AND ITS COMMITTEES
The University Senate is the body that is responsible for the organization, 
control and direction of the academic matters of the University.
Functions and Powers of the Senate as specified in the Universities and 
Other Tertiary Institutions act, 2001 (as amended)
6.1.1  Membership
See Sections 44, 45 and 46 of the Universities and Other Tertiary 
Institutions Act 
(1)    There shall be a Senate for each Public University whose maximum 
number of members shall be determined by the University Council 
from time to time, but the ex-officio members shall not be reduced.
(2)    The Senate shall consist of the following members:
a)   Vice-Chancellor;
b)   The Deputy Vice Chancellors;
c)   Deans and Directors of faculties or schools as may be established 
within the University;
[[page:8]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
4
d)   Two representatives of the Principals of constituent colleges, 
schools or institutes. ” 
e)   Such number of professors and associate professors of the 
University that the University Council may determine which shall 
include at least one professor or associate professor from each 
faculty or school of the University elected by the academic staff of 
the faculty or school;
f )   The University Librarian, Bursar, Dean of Students and Secretary;
g)   Such number of the Non-Academic Staff that the University 
Council may determine to be elected by the Non-Academic Staff;
h) Two students of the University to be elected by the students in 
accordance with the Students Union Procedure;
i)   Three persons who are capable of contributing to the academic 
and social development of the University appointed by the 
Minister from the public.
(3)    Appointed members of the University Senate shall hold office for a 
period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(4)    The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Senate and shall 
preside at all meetings of the Senate at which he or she is present 
and in the absence of the Vice-Chancellor one of the Deputy Vice-
Chancellors shall preside.
(5)    The Academic Registrar of the University shall be the Secretary to the 
Senate.
6.1.2  Functions and Powers of the Senate
(1)  Subject to the provisions of this Act the Senate shall be responsible for 
the organization, control and direction of the academic matters of the 
University and as such the Senate shall be in charge of the teaching, 
research and the general standards of education and research and 
their assessment in the University.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) the Senate shall:
a)   Initiate the academic policy of the University and advise the 
University Council on the required facilities to implement the 
policy;
b)   Direct and regulate the instruction programme and the structure 
of any degree, diploma or certificate course within the University;
c)   Advise the University Council regarding the eligibility and 
qualifications of persons for admission to courses leading to 
the award of degree, diploma, certificate or other award of the 
University;
[[page:9]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
5
d)   Make regulations regarding the content and academic standard of 
any course of study in respect of a degree, diploma, or certificate 
or other wards.
e)   Make regulations regarding the standard of proficiency to be 
attained in each examination for a degree diploma, certificate or 
other award by the University.
f )    Decide which persons have reached the standard of proficiency 
and are fit for the award of any degree, diploma, certificate or other 
awards of the University.
g)   Advise the University Council on the promotion, coordination, 
control and general direction of research in the University.
h)   Consider and report to the University Council on any matter 
relating to, or in connection with the academic work of the 
University.
(3)    The Senate may deprive any person of a degree, diploma, certificate or 
other award of a Public University if after due inquiry it is found that the 
award was obtained through fraud or dishon- ourable or scandalous 
conduct.
(4)   A person deprived of an award under subsection (3) may appeal to the 
University Council against the decision of the Senate.
(5)    The Senate may delegate any of its powers or functions to a faculty, 
school, board of studies or Committee as the Senate may consider fit. 
6.1.3  Rules of Procedure for the Senate and its Committees
6.2       SENATE
1. The Senate shall meet for the discharge of its functions and exercise of 
its powers at least three times in an academic year at a time and place 
that the Senate may decide or as the Vice-Chancellor may require.
2.  The quorum at a meeting of Senate shall be one third of the members 
of the Senate.
3.    Subject to this section the Senate may regulate its own procedure. 
4.     Notice for a Regular Meeting should be issued at least two (2) weeks 
before the date for the Meeting. 
5.   Notice for Special meeting of Senate should be issued at least two (2) 
weeks before the date for the meeting and the agenda for the meeting 
specified.
6.    Documents for a Meeting should be circulated at least one (1) week 
before the date for the Meeting.
7.      No Document(s) should be circulated during a Meeting.
[[page:10]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
6
8.      At a Meeting, only matters, which have been adopted on the Agenda, 
shall be discussed.
9. The decision of the Senate shall normally be arrived at by consensus.  
In the absence of a consensus, the Chairperson shall call for a vote.
10. Decisions taken by voting will be arrived at by a simple majority of the 
members present on motions and issues. Voting shall normally be by 
either show of hands except on contentious issues where it will be by 
secret ballot.
11.    All the actions on decisions taken shall be implemented as specified by 
the Senate.
12.     There shall be time limits specified on the Agenda as the maximum 
time for debate ordiscussion of matters at Meetings as follows: -
a) Communication from the Chair (Maximum 10 minutes)
b) Reactions to Communication (Maximum 10 Minutes)
c) Each of the other items (Maximum 20 Minutes).
13. The Senate shall deliberate its business in a session lasting not more 
than one (1) working day.
14.     There shall be an almanac of Senate Meetings inline with the provisions 
of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act.
15. Standing Orders of the Senate may be suspended by a simple majority 
vote. A motion to suspend Standing Orders should be circulated to 
members two (2) weeks prior to the meeting.
16.     Non-members of Senate may attend Senate to respond to issues and 
reports before Senate 
17.    No member of Senate should sign the attendance book for another 
member.
18.    It is unethical for a member to sign the attendance book and leave the 
Meeting room without  attending the meeting.
6.2.1 Senate Standing Committees
i)    The quorum for the Standing Committees of Senate shall be 50% of 
the members.
ii)    The Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson of any Standing or Special 
Committee must be members of the Senate.
iii) The Terms of Service for a member on a Senate Standing Committee 
will be two years to encourage rotation of members. The members 
may be re-appointed for one more term.
iv) A member is deemed to have been absent with apology when he/she 
has so communicated in writing to the Chairperson/Secretary.
[[page:11]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
7
v) A member is deemed to have been absent without apology if he/she 
has not communicated in writing to the Chairperson/Secretary.
vi) When a member has been absent for three consecutive Regular 
Meetings without a justifiable cause, he/she shall be denied 
membership. This decision will be communicated to the appointing 
authority for replacement.
vii) If a member has to be absent from the University, for more than one 
calendar year, a replacement shall be appointed for the period he 
or she is away. Replacement procedures shall follow appointment 
procedures. 
viii) Every member attending a Meeting shall sign his/her name in the 
attendance book.
iv)    The Chairperson of the Senate and its Committees shall have the power 
to act on behalf of the Committee in matters of urgency, provided that 
such action will be reported for ratification at the next meeting of 
Senate or Committee. Chairpersons of the ad hoc or Special Committee 
are not permitted to act on behalf of their respective Committees.
v) If at the expiration of thirty minutes of the any scheduled Meeting 
no quorum is realised, the Meeting shall be adjourned to a date to be 
fixed by the Chairperson. When a Meeting that had been adjourned for 
lack of quorum reconvenes, business shall be conducted whether or 
not there is a quorum.
6.2.2  Special/ Ad hoc Committees of Senate
Special or ad hoc Committees of Senate shall have a maximum tenure of 
3 months from the date of appoint- ment Procedure for Electing Faculty 
Representatives to the University Senate Deans or Directors shall act as 
returning officers to ensure that the following procedure is followed when 
electing the representatives:
i)  Eligible candidates have to be formally nominated and their 
nominationendorsed by at least two staff members. (i.e nominee and 
seconder)
ii) When more than one candidate has been nominated to contest for the 
position balloting shall be arranged.
iii) A candidate who gets a majority of votes cast in his or her favour shall 
become the elected School  representative and his or her name should 
then be submitted to the Academic Registrar.
The Senate set up the following Standing Committees: -
i)        Admissions Committee.
ii)       Academic Policies and Appeals Committee.
iii)      Ceremonies Committee
iv)      Mature Age Sub-Committee.
[[page:12]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
8
v)       Honorary Awards Committee.
vi)      Board of Research and Graduate Training.
A.       Admissions Committee
a)     Membership
i)      Chairperson: The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) 
ii) Members:  Each College and stand alone Schools shall each  
appoint one (1) person to be a member of the Committee who is a 
member of Senate; Commissioner for Higher Education; Executive 
Secretary for In- ter-University Council for East Africa; Secretary of 
the Uganda National Examinations Board; Deputy Vice-Chancellor 
(Finance and Administration); Dean of Students; University Bursar; 
University Librarian; a representative from the Ministry responsible 
for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and one student 
representative appointed by the Guild.
iii) Secreta ry: The Academic Registrar.
b)     Terms of Reference
(i)    To receive all the applications for undergraduate degree, diploma 
and certificate academic programmes in the University and take 
decisions on all those applications, as per Senate guidelines.
(ii)   To submit annual reports to Senate on undergraduate admission 
matters.
Mature Age and Pre-Entry Examinations Sub-Committee
(A Sub-Committee of the University Admission Committee)
a)    Membership
i)      Chairperson: To be elected by the Senate.
ii)     Members: Three (3) members from the Humanities Disciplines 
and three (3) from the Science Disciplines elected by the University 
Admission Committee
iii)   Secretary: The Academic Registrar.
b)    Terms of Reference
 To be responsible for managing the entrance examination of Mature 
Age applicants
B.      Academic Policies and Appeals Committee
a)     Membership
i)      Chairperson: The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs).
ii)    Members: Members of Senate from each College or Schools
[[page:13]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
9
elected by the Senate, Director of Planning and Development 
Department; Two persons (Male and Female) from the private 
Sector elected by Senate; a representative from the Ministry 
responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and 
two student representatives (one male and one female) appointed 
by the Guild. University Librarian, Commissioner for Higher 
Education from the Ministry responsible for Education
iii)   Secretary: The Academic Registrar.
b)    Terms of Reference
i) To consider and take decisions on all the cases of Appeals on 
the examination matters for the Undergraduate academic 
programmes.
ii) To receive, consider and recommend to the Senate submissions 
and proposals concern- ing new and revised regulations, policy 
and staffing from the Academic Boards of Col- lege or semi- 
independent Schools.
iii)   To evaluate and recommend to Senate proposals for new Academic 
Units. 
iv)    To receive and consider all library matters. 
C.  Board of Research and Graduate Training
a)    Membership
i) Chairperson: The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs).
ii) Members:  Members of Senate from each College or Schools 
elected by the College, The Director of the Directorate of Research 
and Graduate Training, University Librarian, two graduate students 
one of whom shall be female elected by the Guild. Director of 
Makerere Institute of Social Research, University Bursar, Executive 
Director of the National Council for Research. Two (2) persons from 
the private sector elected by Senate.
iii) Secretary:  The Academic Registrar.
b)    Terms of Reference
i) To receive, consider and recommend to senate proposals from the 
college /School Committees on research and Graduate training.
ii) To harmonise all Graduate programmes.
iii) To   review   the   regulations   governing   Graduate   academic   
programmes   and   make recommendations to the Senate.
iv) To receive from colleges Higher Degrees Committees 
recommendations on all the applications for entry into Graduate 
academic programmes and take decisions as per Senate guidelines.
[[page:14]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
10
v)    To consider and take decisions on cases of Appeals on Examination 
matters. 
vi) To consider and take decisions on cases of Examination 
Malpractices.
vii)   To submit biannual reports to Senate as regards to graduate 
studies in the University.
viii) To promote the dissemination of research findings to the 
Community.
ix) To administer the funds for Research and Publications from the 
University funds made available for these purposes.
x) To submit bi-annual report to the Senate on Research and 
Publications including the performance of the funds. 
D.  Honorary Awards Committee
(a)     Membership
(i) Chairperson: The Vice-Chancellor 
(ii) Two (2) Representatives of the University Council
(iii) Two (2) Representatives of Senate who are not members of Council
(b)  Ex-Officio
(i) The Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs)
(ii) The University Secretary
(iii) The Chairperson, Makerere University Council
(c) Secretariat
The Academic Registrar
E.  Ceremonies Committee
(a) Membership
(i) The Chairperson to be appointed by Senate;
(ii) One (1) representative of each College or independent School;
(iii) The University Public Relations Officer;
(iv) The University Security Officer
(v) The Bursar, Makerere University
(vi) The Director, Estates and Works
(vii) A representative of Convocation 
(viii) Academic Registrar who shall be the Secretary
[[page:15]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
11
(b) Terms and Reference
The terms of reference of the Committee shall be to undertake the 
planning and supervision of Graduation Ceremonies and other ceremonies 
like Exhibitions. The specific areas include the following:
(i) Drawing out the schedules for all Graduation Ceremonies for a 
given academic year;
(ii) Arranging to publish one Graduation Booklet for all Graduate and 
Undergraduate students graduating in the “Graduation Week” .  The 
format of the booklet should be similar to the ones currently being 
printed in the centralized graduation system;
(iii) Arrange to issue invitation cards to Graduands and their Guests in 
collaboration with the Academic Registrar;
(iv) Coordinating the parking and directing of Guests to the graduation 
venue in collaboration with the relevant security officials;
(v) Arrange the issuing of Gowns and other Graduation regalia;
(vi) Arrange the issuing of Passes to accredited Professional 
Photographers who will be at different sites;
(vii)  Take care of security matters in collaboration with Makerere 
University Security Department and Makerere University Police 
Post;
(viii) Organise and coordinate entertainment during ceremonies;
(ix) Provide first aid stations at the graduation location in collaboration 
with Makerere University Hospital;
(x)  Deal with media coverage;
(xi) Offer any assistance that may be required by the Academic Units 
for the academic ceremonies to take place;
(xii)  Plan and coordinate the participation all units in the University in 
ceremonies, open days and Exhibitions.
[[page:16]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
12
REVISED GENERAL ADMISSION 
REQUIREMENTS FOR UNDERGRADUATE 
PROGRAMMES
1.0  ADMISSION AVENUES AND SCHEMES 
(a) There are four main avenues of entry to the University academic 
programmes: 
1. The Direct Entry Scheme,
2. The Mature Age Entry Scheme 
3. The Diploma Holders Entry Scheme. 
4. Degree Holders Entry Scheme.
(b) Under the Direct Entry Scheme, Makerere University also offers 
admission through; 
i) Special entry schemes in accordance with affirmative action 
policies approved by Senate and the University Council from time 
to time. These include the Talented Sports Persons, the Persons 
with Disabilities, the District Quota, and the Science, Technology, 
Engineering & Mathematics (STEM).
ii) Special Entry Examination for Diploma in Performing Arts (On 
private sponsorship)   
2.0  THE DIRECT ENTRY SCHEME
(a) A candidate shall be deemed eligible for consideration for admission 
to a first-degree programme of the University if he/she has obtained: 
(i) The Uganda Certificate of Education (O’level) with at least 5 passes 
or an equivalent qualification; and
(ii) At least Two principal passes in relevant subjects obtained at the 
same sitting from the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education 
Examination (A’ Level) or an equivalent qualification, as determined 
by the UNEB. 
(b) A candidate with overall result 7, Y, Z or 9 is not admissible to any 
undergraduate degree of the University 
(c) Candidates without the minimum admission requirements (of two 
Principal passes at A’ Level) may be considered for admission if they 
have obtained a higher education certificate in a relevant field as 
accredited by the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) 
provided the specific programme admission requirements permit.
[[page:17]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
13
(d) For the A-Level Applicants to be eligible for admission on full-time 
day programmes, the last examination must have been sat during the 
academic year in which admission is being sought or not more than 
two years previously. 
(e) The University at its discretion and on the advice of the College/
School concerned, may consider to admit a candidate into a Degree 
Programme, holding only an ‘O’ level qualifications, provided that he/
she has been registered at another recognised University (Prior to 
applying), for a Degree Programme and has successfully completed at 
least one year of University education. He/she must however submit 
that said University transcript(s).
2.1  MODE OF APPLICATION FOR A LEVEL APPLICANT
The application form for placement of students to Makerere University 
is to be completed by Senior Six Leavers who wish to be considered 
for admission by individual Public Universities under government 
sponsorship to the Public Universities and to other Tertiary Education 
Institutions. The form will be used to collect information on applicants and 
this information will later be processed on computer. Each applicant must 
complete the application form. Admission is based on available intake 
capacities approved by the Government. Application fee per candidate will 
be determined by the University from time to time.
The fee should be paid to any Bank used by Uganda Revenue Authority 
(URA) using Payment Reference Number (PRN) generated from the 
online payment portal https://payments.mak.ac.ug. Payments can also 
be through Bank drafts and cheques in the names of Uganda Revenue 
Authority.
Online Application Instructions
Online Application Instructions can be obtained from the University Admissions 
website.  Ensure that the page is secure before you continue. For the avoidance of 
doubt, Applicants should only access the link advertised by the University. 
Filling and care for the application form
Each candidate is encouraged to ensure that they apply to programmes where 
they posses the admission requirements and should be accurately completed. 
Untidy application forms may be rejected.
Candidate’s name
The candidates’ names must be written in full and in capital letters. The names must 
also be identical to the ones used for registration for O’ and A’ Level examinations. 
No abbreviations will be accepted.  Even though the names were indicated on the 
Pass slip as initials, they must be written in full.
[[page:18]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
14
University Programmes
A student may apply for a maximum of Ten programmes (Six choices for national 
merit admission and other special schemes i.e. Talented Sports Persons and 
Persons with disabilities and another four choices for district quota admission) 
offered at the different Public Universities using the same form.
Students should consider the choices of the Programmes they wish to apply for 
before completing the Application Form as it will not be possible to change these 
choices once the forms have been received by the University. The programmes 
at the University are represented by three letter Codes; these are the Codes to be 
written in the space provided for each programme code. The candidate’s name 
will be written in the space provided. The list of programmes and their codes 
is attached. CANDIDATES ARE ADVISED TO ENSURE THAT THEY WRITE THE 
CORRECT CODES FOR THE RESPECTIVE PROGRAMMES . Candidates should 
note that a wrong Programme Code entered will automatically result into the 
Candidate’s name being omitted from the list of Applicants for the particular 
programme(s). 
Other Tertiary Institutions
Space is provided for candidates who may wish to apply for programmes at the 
other Tertiary Education Institutions. The codes for programmes offered at those 
Institutions are to be collected from the JAB Office, Ministry of Education and 
Sports.
Candidate’s Index Number
It is very important that a correct index number is written in full on the application 
form for example u0001/501. The index number should be written in full, clearly 
indicating the centre number.
Citizenship
The appropriate CITIZENSHIP should be clearly indicated on the form. International 
students or Non-Ugandans should not complete the form for Uganda government 
sponsorship. They should fill forms for private sponsorship, which may be obtained 
from the University.
Gender
The Candidates should indicate whether they are MALE (M) or FEMALE (F)
District
It is important that the right Home District is indicated in the appropriate space. 
This is very important especially in relation to district quota admission.  Appendix
[[page:19]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
15
D has Codes for all districts in Uganda. Candidates/Applicants are warned against 
indicating wrong districts. Some Candidates/Applicants indicate districts where 
their schools are located instead of their own individual home districts. If this is 
discovered either at registration or afterwards, the affected person’s admission 
will be cancelled.
Candidates admitted on District Quota will be verified by the District authorities 
to confirm that they originate from those Districts.Year of A’ Level Examinations 
and Centre name
The year of A’ level Examinations e.g. 2023 and School name must be written in 
the space provided. This information will help the University to differentiate and 
identify students who may have sat the A’ level examinations in different years and 
at different centres.
O-Level Results
Candidates/Applicants should provide correct information in regards to the year 
they sat for O’Level, the Index Number and grades obtained per subject. Each 
Candidate must attach a copy of the O’Level Pass Slip, which should be submitted 
to the Admissions Office with the Application form for verification purposes. There 
are cases of candidates who deliberately record better O-Level grades than what 
they actually obtained or deliberately recording falsified A-Level Index Numbers. 
A’ Level candidates are warned against presenting forged O’Level Pass Slips to the 
University. Candidates who sat for examinations outside Uganda should submit 
photocopies of original documents in addition to the UNEB equivalents. The pass 
slips should be stapled on the application form. Candidates who obtained an 
overall Grade of 7, 9, Y or Z at O’Level do not qualify for University admission and 
need not apply. One should have also passed at least 5 subjects at O’Level (i.e. 5 
subjects without a Grade 9).
False Information, Impersonation, Forgery in Admissions
1. All candidates must note that admission to a programme of study 
at Makerere University is provisional, and subject to satisfactory 
verification of one’s academic qualifications stated in the application 
form or online application portal, by the Academic Registrar, at the 
time of registration.  
2. Cases of impersonation, falsification of documents or giving false/
incomplete information whenever discovered, either at application, 
registration or afterwards, will lead to automatic cancellation of 
admission and possible prosecution before courts of law. 
3. Cases involving forgery or falsification of admission documents, or 
4. Unauthorized change of programme or subject combination, will lead 
to cancellation of any academic results, marks and awards obtained
[[page:20]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
16
under the fraudulent acts, and suspension or dismissal from the 
University. 
5. In cases where one has completed studies or has already graduated, 
the University shall invoke Section 45 (3) of the Universities and Other 
Tertiary Institutions Act to cancel and recall the award if it is found that 
the award was obtained through fraud or dishonourable or scandalous 
conduct. 
6. A student found guilty of forgery and falsification of documents shall 
not be eligible for any refund of tuition and functional fees paid to the 
University, regardless of whether services for such fees have not yet 
been received or consumed by the student.
7. A member of the University staff involved in aiding and or abetting 
forgery and falsification of application and/ or admission documents 
shall be subjected to the disciplinary processes and sanctions provided 
for in the Public Service Standing Orders and Makerere University 
Human Resources Manual.
8. Individuals found to be involved in forgeries and falsification of 
application or admission documents stated in (b-f ) above, will in 
addition to the internal university disciplinary processes and sanctions, 
be referred to Police for possible prosecution in courts of law. 
The Names To Use For Registration
The NAMES to use when registering are those which appear on the students 
admission letter of offer and those must be the same names which appear on the 
O-’Level Results Slips/Certificates and on Diploma, Degree and Certificates. ALL 
NAMES MUST BE WRITTEN IN FULL INCLUDING ABBREVIATED ONES. INITIALS ARE 
NOT ACCEPTED
2.2 CHOICES OF B.A. AND B.SC. SUBJECT COMBINATIONS
A) B.A. subject combinations
Applicants admitted to the Bachelor of Arts Degree Programme offered 
in the College of Humanities and Social Sciences; take three subjects 
in the first year. The University Admissions Committee al- locates these 
subjects taking into account the Applicants’ choices, the capacities of the 
Departments and the timetable limitations. The list of subjects available in 
the three Schools of the College of Humanities is indicated under another 
section. This section also shows the Codes and the corresponding possible 
subject combinations, which the candidates should apply for. The subject 
combinations belong to the School where two of the subjects belong. For 
example, a candidate allocated PS, EC, G would belong to the School of 
Social Sciences. The candidates who may want such a subject combination 
should apply for admission to BA(SS) whose Code is ASS. On the other
[[page:21]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
17
hand, a candidate allocated G, H, EC would belong to the School of Liberal 
and Performing Arts and should accordingly apply for admission to BA (A) 
whose Code is ARS.
The 3-digit Numerical Code for each subject combination should be 
written in the space provided e.g. 001 for POS, SOA, SOC. There is provision 
for three subject combinations. An applicant will be considered for 
allocation for the 1st subject combination. In case the 1st choice subject 
combination is not possible, one of the remaining two or any other 
combination may be allocated. Please ensure that you use the new subject 
codes as they appear because some of the codes have changed.
B)  B.SC subject combinations
Each Candidate admitted to the B.SC degree programme will be allocated 
a set of 2 subjects.  The two allocated subjects should have been passed 
well at A- level. The list of subjects offered in the College of Natural 
Sciences is shown on the University Website and application portal. The 
subject of Biology offered at A-level is split into Botany and Zoology at the 
University.
Re-applicants
Applicants who sat A’Level examinations in the previous years should note 
that A’Level results are valid for government sponsorship for only 3 years. 
Those interested in re-applying should attach photocopies of both O’ and 
A’Level results on the application form.
Special College, School or Programme Requirements 
1. Within the framework of the General Direct Entry Requirements, 
there may be special College/ School/Faculty requirements which 
candidates must fulfil to gain admission into a programme in a specific 
academic unit.
2. There are also programme specific requirements, approved by the 
Senate from time to time, that applicants shall have to satisfy.
2.3 WEIGHTING CRITERIA 
1. All the subjects taken at the Advanced Level of Education are grouped 
into four categories and weighted as follows for purposes of admission 
to any programme of undergraduate study in the University.  
        
Subject Category   Weight  
 i) Essential    3    
 ii) Relevant    2  
    iii) Desirable (Subsidiary 
   Mathematics, Computer
[[page:22]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
18
   Studies and General Paper)   1
2. The Essential A’ Level subjects for University Programmes must be 
passed with a Principal Pass. A Principal subject passed at Subsidiary 
level i.e. Grade O can however be weighed as Relevant but not as an 
“Essential” .
3. For a given candidate, not more than three subjects taken at the 
principal level shall carry a weight of 3, 2, or 1.
4. Not more than two subjects shall be weighed as “Essential” .
5. A pass with a Distinction or Credit in a subject taken at subsidiary level 
such as General Paper, Sub-Math or Computer Studies shall carry one 
point. A subsidiary pass ranges from grades D1 to C6.
6. In case of programmes where “Essential” subjects may be three or 
more, an “Essential set” of subjects is defined. The best-performed two 
subjects of the essential set shall be designated as “Essential Subjects” 
and weighted three. The 3rd best done subject from the Essential Set 
shall be designated as the “Relevant Subject” and weighted two.
7. When computing points, special programme requirements are also 
taken into consideration.
8. For A’ Level grades, the conversion scale is A=6, B=5, C=4, D=3, E=2, 
O=1, F=0 points.
9. For ‘O’ level grades, Distinctions 1 & 2 carry 0.3 points, Credits 3 to 6 
carry 0.2, 
10. Passes 7 & 8 carry 0.1 and Fail (9) carries 0.0 weights respectively.
2.4 COMPUTATION OF THE COMBINED WEIGHT OF A 
CANDIDATE FOR ADMISSION TO THE UNIVERSITY
1. The ‘O’ Level weight of a candidate for any programme in the University, 
is obtained by adding up the equivalent weight of the Distinctions, 
Credits and Passes obtained by the candidate, according to the 
weighting system laid out in 2.3.
2. The ‘A’ Level weight, for a given programme, of a candidate is obtained 
by multiplying each subject grade points by the relevant weighting 
factor and adding up for all the subjects taken and passed.
3. The combined weight of a candidate for a given Programme is obtained 
by adding the ‘O’ Level weight obtained in (a) above to the ‘A’ Level 
weight obtained in (b) above. The best candidate for each programme 
is the one with the highest combined weight. 
4. Candidates are selected on merit from those who apply for a programme 
as their first choice plus those who apply for the programme as 2nd, 
3rd, 4th choice etc., if they have not been admitted to programmes of 
their earlier choices. All choices are considered.
[[page:23]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
19
Types of study time/ sessions and programmes
There are seven types of study time or session programmes at the University:
1. Day programmes (DAY) run from 7:00am to 6:00pm 
2. Afternoon programmes run from 1.00 pm to 5.00pm
3. Evening (EVE) programmes run from 5:00pm to 9:00pm 
4. External (EXT) programmes are conducted by correspondence
5. Online programmes are conducted on the University e-learning 
management system.
6. Weekend programs run on Saturday and Sunday. 
7. Block week/ modular conducted with learning interface at selected 
weeks/ times to cover particular course(s) or modules.
Evening Study Programmes 
1. The EVENING Study programmes are designed to offer studying 
opportunities to mainly the working class, although any interested 
person who meets the admission requirements can apply to be 
considered for admission. 
2. Before filling applications, Applicants, are required to check the most 
current list of evening programmes being offered, from the advertised 
list or current published “Notes to Schools” from the Academic 
Registrar’s Department. 
3. Admission to the various evening study programmes is subject to the 
general University admission requirements. Each of the programmes 
has its special requirements which must be fulfilled, in addition to the 
general requirements.
External Study Programmes 
(a) External study programmes are designed to benefit those who meet 
the general admission requirements, but are unable to attend regular 
classes at the University. 
(b) The programmes are coordinated by the Institute of Open Distance 
and E-Learning (IODEL) in conjunction with the mandated discipline 
specific departments/ schools, and are conducted through a 
combination of ODeL, and face-to-face teaching. 
(c) Applicants are required to check the most current list of External 
programmes being offered, from the advertised list or current published 
“Notes to Schools” from the Academic Registrar’s Department, before 
filling application forms. 
 Admission to the various evening study programmes is subject to the 
general University admission requirements. Each of the programmes 
has its special requirements which must be fulfilled, in addition to the 
general requirements.
[[page:24]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
20
2.6 UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES SPECIAL ENTRY 
SCHEMES UNDER DIRECT ENTRY
Makerere University also offers opportunity of entry to the University 
through Special Entry Schemes. These schemes include The Talented 
Sports Persons, Disabled Persons and District Quota Schemes. Special 
Scheme admission benefits candidates un-der government sponsorship 
only as part of the affirmative action.
2.6.1  Persons With Disabilities
1.       This scheme applies only to Direct Entry Candidates
2.   The candidates must meet the admission requirement of having 
obtained at least two Principal  Passes in the essential subjects.
3.  The priority order of selecting disabled candidates as recommended 
by UNISE is:
i) Blin d candidates
ii) Low vision candidates
iii) Deaf candidates
iv) Hard of hearing candidates
v) Candidates with mobility appliances
vi) Candidates with physical disabilities
vii) Albinism
viii) Chronic medical problems e.g. sickle cell, epilepsy, asthma etc.
4. Eligible applicants are required to appear before a panel of specialist 
or experts to ascertain their disability before being considered for 
admission.
5.       Only those identified by an expert appointed by the University shall be 
eligible for admission. 
2.6.2  Talented Sportsmen/Sportswomen Scheme            
1. Governme nt sponsorship on Talented Sports Persons Scheme 
is both a recognition of earlier performance and achievement, 
as well as motivation and requirement for further involvement 
and competitiveness in the sports and games at university level. 
The candidates admitted under the scheme enjoy all benefits of 
government-sponsored students.
2. Candidates do not apply directly to the University, but are 
identified by the respective Sports Associations, which forward 
the candidates’ names, Schools and other details to the National 
Council of Sports. The Council forwards the names to the Ministry 
of Education and Sports which finally sends a list of talented Sport 
persons to the University, preferably before the A ‘level results are 
released.
3. The applicants are then considered for admission to any 
programme. The scheme applies only to Direct Entry candidates.
4. Exemptions from continuous participation in sports may
[[page:25]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
21
be granted  on account of health/medical condition and /or 
academic performance reasons, duly supported by a report and 
documentation from the University Hospital Director and Dean of 
Faculty respectively.
Participation in sports at university level
1. Universities are encouraged to invest in games facilities as well as 
Sports human resource that can handle a wide range of sporting 
types. 
2. Universities that lack certain sports facilities are encouraged to 
enter affiliation status with selected Sports clubs or institutions so 
that their students benefit by using the clubs’ sports facilities. 
3. Given the likely conflict between the study and sports timetables, 
special consideration should be given to beneficiaries that desire 
to change study plan in terms of teaching/learning during Day or 
Evening which ever time may be applicable, or deferred/make up 
assessment/examination as may be applicable as long as there 
is prior formal request through the Sports Tutor, the Dean of 
Students and approval granted by the Dean of School is secured. 
4. Bene ficiaries of the sports scheme are restricted from playing for 
another sports team in any tournament where their respective 
Universities are competing, unless when they are officially released 
by their Universities. 
5. A standing Sports Sub Committee should be established and 
constituted by the Universities Joint Consultative Admission 
Committee to undertake verification and validation of the sports 
short listed candidates to ensure that they meet the minimum 
requirements of the Sports Scheme Admission Policy.
6. Every public University establishes a Sub Committee of its 
Admission Committee that will monitor and promote the 
continued participation of the admitted students under the sports 
scheme in University sports activities during their study tenure at 
the University. 
7. Beneficiaries of the Sports Scheme that neglect or fail to participate 
in the University sports activities and competitions without valid 
reason(s) as provided for in the policy may be recommended to the 
Senate Admission Committee for cancellation of the sponsorship. 
Cancellation of sponsorship shall not affect the admission and 
registration of the student on the programme. One whose 
sponsorship is cancelled may appeal the decision for review by the 
University Senate. 
8. The c omposition of the Standing Sports Sub Committee of the 
Universities Joint Consultative Committee on Admissions should 
include: 
1. A Chairperson selected from among the members of Senate
2. 2 Academic Registrars from Public Universities
3. 2 Deans of Students from Public Universities
4. 2 Sports Tutors from Public Universities
5. Secretary
[[page:26]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
22
The Mandate of the Standing Committee  
1. Shoul d report to the Consultative Joint Committee of Public 
Universities.
2. Track and validate admitted sports persons through various forms 
including, but not limited to background checks and practical 
interviews.  
3. Draw up guidelines by which a beneficiary may lose the 
sponsorship. This should be done in consultation with other 
stakeholders.
4. Spell out the details of how Universities should be involved in the 
selection of beneficiaries.
Slots for the Scholarship Scheme
The number of slots for talented sports men/ women has been increased 
from 40 to 100 (one hundred).
Inclusion of Sports talent from the Private Admission Scheme 
1. Esta blish a private fund that targets sports talent from the private 
sponsorship scheme under a 100% tuition waiver arrangement for 
students on University teams.
2. Any slot that is declared vacant (in writing) as a result of not being 
taken up by the applicant should be allocated to the next best 
applicant on the government sponsorship shortlist.
Managing affirmative action on highly competitive and limited 
intake capacity Academic Programmes
1. In order to balance competition in admission to this category of 
programmes, applicants for highly competitive and limited intake 
programmes (including those candidates that are already admitted 
on Government Sponsorship on their own merit but nominated 
by the sports scheme) shall have four (4) points added to their 
weighted points. They should then be admitted to the earliest of 
their choices where they meet the cut off points for National Merit 
and where intake capacity allows in their Universities.
2. Programmes with very low intake capacities yet highly competitive 
are hereby listed, subject to regular review by the Senate;
Highly Competitive Programmes as of 2022/2023 Academic Y ear 
ACADEMIC 
PROGRAMME
CODE UNIV Capacity
1 Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of 
Surgery
MAM Mak 90
2 Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of 
Surgery
MBM MUST 40
[[page:27]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
23
3 Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of 
Surgery
MED BUS 10
4 Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of 
Surgery
GUM GU 35
5 Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of 
Surgery
SOM SUN 20
6 Bachelor of Pharmacy PHA Mak 20
7 Bachelor of Pharmacy PHM MUST 5
8 Bachelor of Dental Surgery BDS Mak 15
9 Bachelor of Science (Medical Radiog-
raphy)
BMR Mak 12
10 Bachelor of Nursing NUR Mak 10
11 Bachelor of Nursing NUM MUST 5
12 Bachelor of Nursing BNS BUS 3
13 Bachelor of Science (Biomedical Engi-
neering)
BMR Mak 12
14 BSC (Petroleum  Geoscience & Produc-
tion)
BPG Mak 10
15 Bachelor of Architecture ARC Mak 20
16 Bachelor of Architecture ARD KYA 7
17 Bachelor of Science (Civil Engineering) CIV Mak 45
18 Bachelor of Science (Civil Engineering KCE KAB 9
19 Bachelor of Engineering in Civil & 
Building Engineering
ECD KYA 10
20 Bachelor of Science (Electrical Engi-
neering)
ELE Mak 45
21 Bachelor of Electrical Engineering BEL KYA 7
22 Bachelor of Electrical Engineering EEB BUS 3
23 Bachelor of Electrical Engineering KEE KAB 9
24 Bachelor of Engineering in  Electronics 
& Computer Engineering
ECS SUN 27
25 Bachelor of Science (Mechanical 
Engineering)
MEC Mak 40
26 Bachelor of Mechanical Engineering KME KAB 9
[[page:28]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
24
27 Bachelor of Engineering in Mechanical 
and Manufacturing Engineering
EMD KYA 10
28 Telecommunication Engineering in 
Telecommunication Engineering
ETD KYA 10
29 Bachelor of Laws LAW MAK 40
2.6.3  THE DISTRICT QUOTA SCHEME
1. Candidates admitted through this scheme may be admitted for any 
degree programme of the University
2. Priority shall be given to candidates born in particular district and 
studied from a school within the district (Home District)
3. If the district fails to fill the slots then students originating from 
that district but who studied from other districts/elsewhere shall be 
considered.
4.  Candidates must be Ugandans. The scheme applies only to Direct 
Entry candidates
3.0 THE MATURE AGE ENTRY SCHEME 
 Mature Age Entry Scheme is applicable under the following policy 
regulations: 
1. For a candidate to qualify for entry to the University he/she must sit 
and pass the University Mature Age Entry Examination. 
2. To be eligible for the Examination, the candidate must be at least 25 
years old before 1st August of the year in which admission is sought 
(unless exemption is provided under a specific programme, as 
approved by the Senate).
3. A candidate who previously attended a programme at Makerere 
University shall not be re-admitted to the University under this scheme 
to a programme of study in which he/she previously failed to qualify. 
4. The Mature Age Entry Scheme is open to Ugandans only. 
5. Admission of candidates who have sat and passed the Mature Age 
Examination shall depend on the admission intake quota and available 
vacancies per programme, as determined by the Senate from time to 
time.
6. An applicant who qualifies for admission under other entry schemes 
will not be eligible for admission through mature age. For avoidance 
of doubt, Degree and Diploma holders are not eligible for mature age 
entry scheme.
[[page:29]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
25
The application process
The application process is coordinated by the Mature Age Office in the 
Academic Registrar’s Office in accordance with the Senate policy and 
guidelines as follows:
1.    Application shall be made online through the link: https://www.see.
mak.ac.ug.
2. The fee should be paid to any Bank used by Uganda Revenue Authority 
(URA) using Payment Reference Number (PRN) generated from the 
online payment portal https://payments.mak.ac.ug. Payments can also 
be through Bank drafts and cheques in the names of Uganda Revenue 
Authority. 
Guidelines for Processing the Mature-Age Examination 
Results
1. That the Mature-Age Committee shall be responsible for devising 
mechanisms to ensure the security and integrity of the Mature-Age 
examinations.
2.    Identified examiners shall serve for a period not exceeding three (3) 
years consecutively.
3.   Examination moderation shall be done at academic unit level by 
designated staff.
4. To avoid leakage, examinations with apparent errors shall not be 
discussed after moderation has been done.
5. Moderated examination questions shall be sealed in clearly labelled 
envelopes and submitted to the Academic Registrar for safe storage 
in the Question Bank. Each course shall have its Question Bank or a 
section thereof.
6. The examination questions shall be submitted along with moderated 
marking guides enclosed in separate envelopes with appropriate 
labels for ease of identification. 
7. Marking of all Mature-Age Entry Scheme examinations shall be done in 
groups and at a centralised venue exclusively gazette for this activity.
8.  The Mature-Age Entry Scheme examinations shall be set and marked 
by designated academic staff at the rank of Lecturer from Facalties/
Schools /Institutes
9. Confidential official channels shall be used to identify Mature-Age 
Entry Scheme examination setters and markers with the assistance of 
Heads of Department, Deans and Principals of relevant academic units. 
The Academic Registrar shall appoint a setter with an assistant for a 
three-(3) year period.
[[page:30]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
26
10. The Mature Age Committee shall each year designate persons (a team 
to be determined by the committee) to be in charge of assembling, 
printing and distributing Mature-Age examinations.
11. Results shall be compiled by a team designated by the Mature-Age 
Entry Scheme Committee.
12.   Identified Invigilators shall be approved by the Mature-Age Entry 
Scheme Committee
13. The Scripts that are Marked shall be verified by designated members 
of the Mature-Age Entry Scheme Committee to ensure the consistency 
and integrity of the process. 
14.  The full Compiled results of the examinations shall be presented   
to the Mature-Age Entry Scheme Committee for approval before 
public display of results is done, albeit with names concealed.
15.  The Head Quality Assurance Unit shall receive annual reports on   
the conduct of Mature Age examinations.
16.  The admission quotas shall be reviewed regularly by Senate. 
The  quota on government sponsorship and Private Scheme shall 
be 5% unless reviewed by Senate.
Nature of Examination
i) Paper I: Altitude Test
 The Aptitude test paper shall test how well a Candidate can apply 
concepts to solving problems. The paper shall be made up of three 
(3) parts: English Language, Mathematics and Comprehension.
ii) Paper II: Essay Paper
a) The Essay test paper shall address specific programme that candidates 
are interested in pursuing at the University. 
b)    The Essay paper shall also include a general section which shall be 
compulsory.
Who qualifies to set examinations?
That Dean of an Academic Unit shall propose three (3) names of staff for 
appointment as setters to the Academic Registrar who shall appoint one 
setter with an Assistant for each course for a period of three (3) years.
Funding of the scheme
a)    The Scheme shall be self-financing and its budget shall be drawn from 
the Application Fee agreed upon by Senate and approved by Council.
b)    The fees charged shall finance the activities of the Scheme and shall 
include the following activities:
[[page:31]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
27
i)     Setting questions for the question bank
 ii)    Invigilation of examinations
iii)   Typing and printing examinations 
iv)   Marking examinations
v)     Purchase of examination materials. 
vi)   Contribution to Central Pool
c)     That the University shall always review the application fee regularly to 
ensure that the Scheme is self-financing without profit motive.
5. DIPLOMA HOLDERS’ AVENUE FOR ADMISSION 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR 2025/2026 ACADEMIC YEAR
a. Quota for Diploma Holders
1. Government Sponsorship for Diploma Holders. The number of 
candidates admitted to each programme under the Diploma Holders 
Avenue should not exceed 5% of the intake per programme.
2. For the Private Scheme the quota for Diploma and Degree Holder 
applicants is 15% and 5% respectively of the intake per programme.
b. Required performance in the Diplomas
At least Second Class, Credit or equivalent performance from recognised 
Institutions /chartered Universities.
Ordinary Diploma Programme
The minimum entry requirements for admission to an ordinary diploma 
programme are:
a)    Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) with at least 5 passes
b)    Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) with at least 1 
Principalpass and 2 Subsidiary passes obtained at the same sittin g or 
its equivalent.
C.  Degree holders’ entry scheme
1. The Degree Holders entry scheme is open to graduates in any discipline 
from a recognized and or chartered University or Institution of higher 
learning.
2. The specific admission requirements to particular academic 
programmes will vary in accordance with the discipline requirements 
determined by the School and approved by the Senate.
3. An Applicant may, where applicable request for exemption from a 
course or a number of courses where the course content previously 
covered (In a particular course at degree level) covers at least 75% of
[[page:32]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
28
the relevant course content within the degree program to which the 
applicant is seeking admission.
4. The course to be exempted as in (i) above, should have been passed 
with at least at a GP of 3.0 or 60%.
5. Such an exemption shall only be granted with approval of the 
Department/ School Board is satisfied that the course was taken not 
more than three years from the time of application.
6. Exemption for first year courses may be granted where the degree 
programme to which one is seeking admission is aligned and/or 
provides for such exemption for a particular diploma programme (s). In 
this case the candidate may be admitted to an appropriate academic 
year of study.
7. Where exemption has been granted, the minimum graduation load 
requirements shall take into consideration the courses exempted and 
the respective grades obtained.
8. Any course exemption(s) shall not be more than 40% of the minimum 
graduation load of a particular programme at Makerere University.
PLEASE NOTE THAT: admission was based on available approved intake capacities for 
2025/2026 academic year.
1. COLLEGE OF HEAL TH SCIENCES -CHS
1.1 BACHELOR OF MEDICINE AND BACHELOR OF SURGERY 
(MAM)
1.1.1 Diploma Holders Entry Scheme:
A candidate must have the following;
 • A diploma in a health/biological science related discipline
 • Working experience of at least 2 years in those relevant fields 
Such diploma holders shall include;
1. Medical Laboratory Technologists
2. Radiographers 
3. Physiotherapists
4. Anaesthetic officers 
5. Clinical Ophthalmic officers 
6. Clinical Orthopaedic officers 
7. Environmental Health Officers
[[page:33]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
29
8. Public Health Dental Assistant 
9. Public Health Assistants
10. Dispensers 
11. Psychiatry clinical officers 
12. Uganda Registered Nurses ‘A’ level certificate holders
13. Uganda Registered Midwives A level certificate holders 
14. Clinical officers (formerly called medical assistants) 
15. Diploma in Education (Biology, Chemistry)
1.1.2    Degree holders 
1. Bachelor of Nursing Science (BNSc) 
2. Bachelor of Science in Medical Radiography (BMR)
3. Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Sciences (BOS) 
4. Bachelor of Cytotechnology (BYT) 
5. Bachelor of Science in Speech and Language Therapy (BSL) 
6. Bachelor of Science with Education – Biological (EDB) 
7. Bachelor of Science – Biological (SCB) 
8. Bachelor of Environmental Health (BEH) 
1.2 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING 
(BBI)
1.2.1  Diploma Holders Entry Scheme
Holders of an Ordinary Technical Diploma or its equivalent can be 
admitted to the programme.  Applicants should have obtained a Credit 
Class diploma with at least a Credit Pass in Mathematics or Physics. Other 
eligible credit class diplomas with at least a credit pass in Mathematics or 
Physics include;
a. Radiographers
b. Anaesthetic Assistants
c. Medical Laboratory Technologists
d. Clinical Officers
e. Dispensers
f. Mechanical, Biomedical or Electrical Engineering Diplomas
1.2.2  Degree Holder Entry Scheme
To qualify for admission for BSc. Biomedical Engineering through this 
scheme, the candidate must hold a Bachelor’s degree of second-class 
lower division and above in a scientific or technological field including, 
Biomedical Laboratory Technology, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical 
Engineering, Telecommunication Engineering, Computer Engineering,
[[page:34]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
30
Computer Science, Radiology, Biotechnology and any other related field 
from a recognized University. All other admission requirements and 
regulations of Makerere University shall apply.
1.3 BACHELOR OF PHARMACY (PHA)
1.3.1  Diploma Holders Entry Scheme
For admission to this programme under the Diploma Holders Entry 
Scheme, a candidate must fulfil the following: -
i.   The candidate must have attained at least a credit in Chemistry at 
UCE level or its equivalence. 
ii.  The candidate must be a holder of a Diploma in Pharmacy or in any 
other Health Sciences, awarded by an institution chartered and 
accredited or recognized by NCHE (National Council for Higher 
Education) and recognized by the relevant professional body, or 
an equivalent.
NB: Priority must be given to those with Diploma in Pharmacy over score (CGPA) by 
other health scientists. So two thirds (2/3) of the slots must be to them.
iii.  The candidate must have had at least a “Credit” in the overall  
assessment.
NB: Where multiple candidates are shortlisted from different awarding institutions, 
the top candidate from each institution shall first be considered independent of their 
comparative CGPA’s provided they meet the minimum CGPA requirements. The runner 
up candidates and all subsequent cases shall also be considered in the same manner.
1.3.2   Degree holders’ admission scheme
i)  Admission into first year
Holders of the Bachelor of Science Chemistry/Biochemistry, Bachelor of Biomedical 
Engineering, and Bachelor of Cytotechnology degrees will be admitted into the 
first year of the Bachelor of Pharmacy programme if they have a CGPA of at least 
3.6.
NB: 
a. Where multiple candidates are shortlisted from different awarding institutions, 
the top candidate from each institution shall first be considered independent of their 
comparative CGPA’s provided they meet the minimum CGPA requirements. The runner 
up candidates and all subsequent cases shall also be considered in the same manner. 
 b. This does not exempt them from being mandated to do any course (or set of courses) 
in Y ear one or two, which they have not sufficiently covered.
[[page:35]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
31
a. Have a CGPA of at least 3.6 out of 5.0, or its equivalent. 
b. The curriculum followed comprehensively covered required biomedical courses.
1. Where multiple candidates are shortlisted from different awarding institutions, 
the top candidate from each institution shall first be considered independent of their 
comparative CGPA’s provided they meet the minimum CGPA requirements. The runner 
up candidates and all subsequent cases shall also be considered in the same manner. 
2. This does not exempt them from being mandated to do any course (or set of courses) 
in Y ear one or two, which they have not sufficiently covered 
1.4   BACHELOR OF DENTAL SURGERY (BDS)
A Diploma in any of the following health disciplines and a working
experience of at least 2 years in the relevant fields;
(i) Medical Laboratory Technologists 
(ii) Radiographers 
(iii) Physiotherapists 
(iv) Anaesthetic Officers
(v) Medical Assistants 
(vi) Orthopaedic Officers/Assistants
(vii) Clinical Ophthalmic Officers 
(viii) Environmental Health Officers
(ix) Public Health Dental Assistants
(x) Public Health Assistants
(xi) Dispensers/Pharmacy Technicians
(xii) Psychiatry Clinical Officers 
(xiii) Occupational Therapy
(xiv) Orthopaedic Technology.
1.5      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN MEDICAL RADIOGRAPHY
Applicants must possess Diplomas in the following Health Disciplines from 
recognised institutions
a. A registered Nurse with a diploma
b. A registered Midwife with a diploma 
c. A Nurse with a diploma in comprehensive nursing.
d. Psychiatric nursing diploma
e. A credit pass holder of health discipline diploma(s). Such diplomas 
shall include: Clinical medicine, Psychiatry, Ophthalmology, Ear, Nose 
and Throat, Orthopaedic, Physiotherapy, Anaesthesia, Public health
[[page:36]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
32
1.6  BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN MEDICAL RADIOGRAPHY (BMR)
1.6.1  Diploma Entry Scheme:
Eligible candidates are required to have attained at least a second-class 
upper diploma in Medical Radiography, Clinical Medicine, Orthopedics 
Medicine and Pharmacy from a recognized institution.
1.6.2  Degree Holders Entry Scheme:
Eligible candidates are required to have a minimum of second-class upper 
degree in Biomedical Sciences to be considered for admission.
1.7.     BACHELOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEAL TH SCIENCE (BEH)
1.7.1  Diploma Holders’ Scheme
Holders of Diploma in Environmental Health (or in any other 
environmental health related programme) of Makerere University or from 
any recognized University/Institution may be admitted to the programme. 
1.7.2  Degree Holders’ Scheme 
Admission may also be by degree holder’s scheme for applicants with a 
Bachelor’s degree in any science discipline.
1.8 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN SPEECH AND LANGUAGE 
THERAPY (BSL)
1.8.1   Diploma Holders Entry
For those holding a diploma in any of the disciplines below:
a. Occupational therapist with a diploma (should be registered)
b. Physiotherapist with a diploma (should be registered)
c. Special needs Education with a diploma (should be registered)
d. Clinical officer with a diploma (should be registered)
A candidate must have the following;
• Working experience of at least 2 years in those relevant fields
1.8.2   Degree Holders Entry
To be admitted into the BSL programme, candidates should have attained 
a degree in;
a. Psychology
b. Linguistics
c. Special needs Education
d. Dentistry
e. Medicine and surgery
[[page:37]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
33
NB. Candidates falling under a, b, c should have passed biology and chemistry at Ordinary 
level.
• All candidates should have 2 years’ experience in their related field of work
• All candidates must attend an initial interview prior to admittance on the 
programme.
• Entrants must demonstrate proficiency in spoken and written English language 
which is essential to be able to undertake the programme. 
• This proficiency will be evaluated during the interview and is necessary to avoid 
intake of entrants with significant communication difficulties.
1.9 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN DENTAL TECHNOLOGY (BDT) – 
PRIVATE SPONSORSHIP
A relevant Diploma in any Health field from recognised Institutions.
1.10   Bachelor of Cytotechnology (BYT)
At least a Credit diploma in the following Health Disciplines:
(i) Environmental Health Officers
(ii) Clinical Officers
(iii) Clinical Ophthalmic Officers
(iv) Dispensers
(v) Anaesthetic Assistants/Officers
(vi) Medical Laboratory Technologists
(vii) Orthopaedics
(viii) Physiotherapy
(ix) Public Health Assistants
(x) Public Health Dental Assistant
(xi) Radiology
(xii) Diploma in Health Education
(xiii) Psychiatric Clinical Officers
(xiv) Uganda Registered Midwives (with A’ Level Certificate)
(xv) Uganda Registered Nurses (with A’ Level Certificate)
N.B Applicants should have A’ Level Principal passes in Chemistry and Biology.
1.10.2  Degree holders (Private sponsorship)
Holders of a degree or its equivalent closely associated with or related 
to Medical Laboratory disciplines will qualify to be admitted to the
[[page:38]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
34
programme and must have obtained principal passes in Biology and 
Chemistry at A’ level. 
1.11    BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN OPTOMETRY (BPT)
1.11.1  Diploma Entry Scheme
A candidate may be admitted if he/she has a National Diploma in health-
related discipline or its equivalent from charted institution with at least a 
second class standing or equivalent from the following areas:
(i) Diploma in Optometry
(ii) Medical Laboratory Technologists
(iii) Ophthalmic Clinical Officers
(iv) Radiographers
(v) Physiotherapists
(vi) Anaesthetic officers
(vii) Clinical Orthopaedic officers
(viii) Environmental Health Officers
(ix) Public Health Dental Assistant
(x) Public Health Assistants
(xi) Pharmacy Dispensers
(xii) Psychiatry clinical officers
(xiii) Uganda Registered Nurses with Diploma
(xiv) Uganda Registered Midwives with Diploma
(xv) Clinical Officers (formerly called medical assistants)
2.       COLLEGE OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION 
SCIENCES (DIPLOMA  HOLDERS’ REQUIREMENTS)
2.1      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
Have an honours Diploma in Computer Science, Information Technology, 
Computer Engineering, Mathematics, Electrical Engineering or Software 
Engineering from a recognised Institution. Students admitted via the 
diploma scheme shall start in first year.
2.1.2    Degree Holders entry:
For a candidate to be admitted via the degree holder scheme, s/he must; 
satisfy the general minimum entry requirements of Makerere University. 
In addition, candidates seeking admission through this avenue must have 
obtained:
[[page:39]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
35
At least second class degree in line of Mathematics, Statistics, Engineering, 
Computing, Physics, Chemistry, Science Education, Economics, and 
Geography attained from a recognised Institution
2.2      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN SOFTWARE ENGINEERING(BWS)
2.2.1  Diploma Holders:
For a candidate to be admitted via the diploma entry scheme, she/he 
must:
Satisfy the general entry requirements of Makerere University.  In addition, 
candidates seeking entry through this avenue must have obtained at 
least a second class (lower division) diploma in software engineering, 
computer science, mathematics, engineering, information technology and 
statistics or another diploma with software applications/development, 
mathematics, computer science or information technology as one of the 
subjects.  The diploma must be from a recognised institution.
2.2.2  Degree Holders:
For a candidate to be admitted via the degree entry scheme, she/he must;
Satisfy the general minimum entry requirements of Makerere University.  
In addition, candidates seeking admission through this avenue must 
have obtained at least a second class degree in line of mathematics, 
statistics, engineering, Economics, Computing, Physics, Chemistry, Science 
Education, Economics, Geography attained from a recognised Institution.
2.3      BACHELOR OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND TECHNOLOGY
Applicants should possess at least a second class (lower division) Diploma 
in Computer Science, Diploma in Information Technology or any other 
Diploma with Business or Computing aspects or equivalent performance 
from recognised institutions by the Makerere University Senate / National 
Council of Higher Education.
2.3.2. Degree Holders
For a candidate to be admitted via degree holder scheme, s/he must; satisfy 
the general minimum entry requirements of Makerere University. In addition, 
candidates seeking admission through this avenue must be obtained:
a) At least second-class degree in line of Mathematics, statistics, 
Engineering, Computing, physics, chemistry, Science Education, 
Economics, Geography.
b)  The degree must be attained from a chartered Institution.
[[page:40]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
36
2.4      BACHELOR OF LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE(LIS)
2.4.1 Diploma Holder’s Entry:
There shall be two avenues for diploma holder applicants:
(i) Holders of a Diploma in Librarianship, information studies/science, 
records and archives management from a recognized institution 
shall join the programme in the second year. The applicants should 
have obtained a Credit Class Diploma.
(ii) Holders of a Diploma in related fields like Information 
Management, Knowledge Management, Publishing, Computer 
science, Information Systems/Technology or any other related field 
(As shall be determined by the Department) from any recognized 
institution shall be admitted to the BLIS programme in first year. 
The applicants should have obtained a Credit Class Diploma.
 2.4.2 Degree Holder’s Entry:
Holders of any Degree from a recognized university or institution of Higher 
learning may be     admitted to the BLIS programme.
3. COLLEGE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE, ANIMAL 
RESOURCES AND BIOSECURITY (DIPLOMA 
REQUIREMENTS)
3.1 BACHELOR OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
A Diploma in Animal Health, Animal Husbandry or its equivalent from recognised 
Institutions. Diplomas with a background in Biological sciences shall also be 
considered. 
3.2 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN WILDLIFE HEAL TH AND 
MANAGEMENT(ML T)
An Ordinary Diploma in Biomedical (Medical) Laboratory Technology or its 
equivalent from a recognised Institution.
3.3 BACHELOR OF BIOMEDICAL LABORATORY 
TECHNOLOGY(BAP)
An Ordinary Diploma in Animal Health and Production (or its equivalent) from 
recognised Institutions.
[[page:41]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
37
3.4 BACHELOR OF INDUSTRIAL LIVESTOCK AND 
BUSINESS (BLB) WITH THE FOLLOWING OPTIONS FOR 
SPECIALIZATION IN YEAR TWO – PRIVATE SPONSORSHIP 
ONLY
3.4. 1. Diploma Holders
For admission to the BLB program under the Diploma Holders Enter Scheme, an 
applicant must be a holder of a minimum of Second Class lower division Ordinary 
Diploma in the fields of Animal Health and/or Animal Production, Agriculture, 
Forestry, Fisheries and Aquaculture (or their equivalents) or an Ordinary Diploma 
in Biological Sciences for an institution recognized by Makerere University Senate/
National Council for Higher Education.
3. 4. 2. Degree Holders
Applicants with a first degree in any field of study in biological sciences are eligible 
for admission to this program
4.       COLLEGE OF AGRICUL TURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
SCIENCES  (CAES)
4.1 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN AGRICUL TURAL 
ENGINEERING(AGE)
An ordinary Technician Diploma, with at least credit 3 in Mathematics, from a 
recognised Institution of Higher Learning. 
A candidate with a diploma may be exempted from year 1 if he/she has passed 
successfully (with at least credit 3) in the following courses:
i.      Engineering Mathematics 
ii.     Engineering Drawing
iii.    Engineering Mechanics
 iv.    Electrical Engineering
v.     Mechanical Engineering 
vi.    Mechanics of Materials
vii.   Introduction to Computers
viii.  Thermodynamics
[[page:42]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
38
4.2 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN AGRICUL TURE (AGR)
 At least Class II (Lower Division) National Diploma in Agriculture or Animal 
Husbandry or its equivalent obtained from a recognised Institution of Higher 
Learning.
    Applicants must have obtained at least a Principal Pass in Biology or 
Chemistry at A’ Level. 
4.3 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN FOOD SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY (FST)
 A National diploma in either:
(i) Food Science or Food Technology
(ii) Veterinary Science
(iii)  Forestry or Agriculture 
(ii)  Fisheries
(iii)  Laboratory Technology
(iv) Education (for applicants that studied at least two of the following 
subjects:  Biology, Chemistry, Human Nutrition, Agriculture, Physics).
(v) Dairy Science, Technology, Microbiology and Nutrition
4.4 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN AGRICUL TURAL LAND USE AND 
MANAGEMENT (BAI)
4.4.1  Diploma entry scheme
A candidate may be admitted if he/she has a national diploma or its equivalent 
of at least a second class standing or equivalent in Agriculture, Education with 
Agriculture and /or Biology, Livestock, Forestry, Agroforestry, Environment, 
Agricultural Engineering, Fisheries, Food Science and related fields from recognised 
and accredited Institutions. Applicants with Diplomas in Education must have 
studied any of the following subjects: Agriculture and any other subject. 
4.4.2  Degree Holders 
A candidate may be admitted if she/he holds a Bachelor’s degree (or equivalent) in 
biological Sciences from a recognized and chartered University.
4.5  BACHELOR OF AGRIBUSINESS MANAGEMENT (AGM)
At least Class II (Lower Division) National Diploma in Agriculture, Agribusiness or 
Agricultural related Business Studies or its equivalent from recognized Institution.
Applicants must have obtained at least a Principal Pass in any of the following 
subjects: Agriculture, Biology, Chemistry or Entrepreneurship at A’ Level.
[[page:43]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
39
4.6  BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN HUMAN NUTRITION AND 
DIETETICS (BHD)
4.6.1 Diploma Entry Scheme 
Holders of at least a Second Class/Credit Diploma in any of the disciplines below, 
obtained from a recognized institution may be admitted to the programme: 
a)   Human Nutrition, Home Economics, Food Science, Food Processing 
Technology, Science Technology (Biology/Chemistry), Catering, 
Agriculture, Chemistry or Biology
b) Health/Medical disciplines such as: Medical Laboratory Technology, 
Physiotherapy, Anesthesia, Orthopedics, Clinical Medicine, Clinical 
Ophthalmology, Environmental Health, Public Health, Dental Public 
Health, Midwifery, Comprehensive Nursing and Community Health 
c) Education having studied any of the following: Biology, Chemistry, 
Agriculture, Home Economics 
4.6.2  Degree Holders 
Under this scheme, applicants should at least have a second-class lower degree in 
a biological science discipline obtained from any recognized institution of higher 
learning.
4.7    BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN FORESTRY (BOF)
4.7.1  Diploma Holders
A candidate may be admitted if she/he has at least a second class Diploma in 
Forestry, Carpentry and Joinery, Wildlife, Horticulture, Agroforestry or Agriculture 
from a recognized institution.
4.7.2  Degree Holders
A candidate may be admitted if she/he holds a Bachelor’s degree in relevant 
disciplines such as Environmental Sciences, Botany, Zoology, Agriculture, Extension 
Education, Meteorology, Geography and Social Sciences from a recognized 
University/Institution.
4.8    BACHELOR OF TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 
(BTH) 
4.8.1  Diploma Holders
A candidate may be admitted if she/he has a National Diploma or its equivalent 
of at least a Second Class standing or equivalent in Tourism and Hospitality field, 
Travel and Leisure, Forestry, Wildlife, Business Studies and Management Studies 
from a Chartered Institution.
[[page:44]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
40
4.8.2  Degree holders
A candidate may be admitted if she/he holds a Bachelor’s degree (or equivalent) in 
any area of study from a chartered and recognized University or Institution.
4.9 BACHELOR OF GEOGRAPHICAL SCIENCES (BGS)
4.9.1 Diploma Holders
Holders of a second-class diploma in Education majoring in Geography or its 
equivalent from a recognized institution
4.9.2  Degree Holders
Degree holders in disciplines related to geographical sciences and wish to get 
enrolled on the program
At least a Second Class Diploma in Meteorology or its equivalent from recognised 
Institutions.
4.10 BACHELOR OF AGRICUL TURAL EXTENSION & RURAL 
INNOVATION/EXTERNAL (BIX) PRIVATE SPONSORSHIP
4.10.1 Diploma entry scheme
A candidate may be admitted if he/she has a national diploma or its equivalent 
of at least a second class standing or equivalent in Agriculture, Education with 
Agriculture and or Biology, Livestock, Forestry, Agroforestry, Environment, 
Agricultural Engineering, Fisheries, Food Science and related fields from recognised 
and accredited Institutions. Applicants with Diplomas in Education must have 
studied any of the following subjects: Agriculture and any other subject. 
4.10.2  Degree Holders
A candidate may be admitted if she/he holds a Bachelor’s degree (or equivalent) 
in biological Sciences from a recognized and chartered University or Institution.
4.11  BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN WATER AND IRRIGATION 
ENGINEERING (BWE)
Applicants holding Ordinary Technician Diploma or its equivalent in Agricultural 
Mechanization, Agricultural Engineering, Civil Engineering or water-related 
studies can be admitted to the programme. The applicant should have obtained 
at least a Credit/Class II diploma with at least credit performance in Mathematics.
Admission, other than to the First year shall require a recommendation of the 
College Board and approval by Senate on, the basis of studies undertaken at 
another recognized University or equivalent institution.
[[page:45]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
41
4.12 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN BIOPROCESSING ENGINEERING 
(BBP)
4.12.1 Diploma Holders 
Applicants holding Ordinary Technician Diploma in Biosystems Engineering, food 
process Engineering, Biological engineering or its equivalent can be admitted to 
the course.  The applicant should have obtained at least a Credit/Class II diploma 
with at least credit three in Chemistry and Mathematics from a recognized 
institution.
4.12.2 Degree Holders
A candidate may be admitted if she/he holds a Bachelor’s degree in relevant 
field such as Chemical Engineering, Biochemical Engineering, biochemical 
engineering, Biotechnology, Biological Engineering, Microbiology, Food Science 
and Technology, and Biochemistry
4.13 BACHELOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES(BEV)
4.13.1 Diploma entry scheme 
Holders of relevant Diplomas (at least a second class upper) in science-related 
subjects, including Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics, Economics, 
Forestry, Agriculture and Geography from Makerere University or a chartered and 
recognized University or Institution. 
4.13.2 Degree Holders Scheme 
A candidate may be admitted to the programme if she/he holds a Bachelor’s 
degree in relevant disciplines such as Forestry, Botany, Zoology, Agriculture, 
Extension Education, Geography and Social Sciences from a recognized University/
Institution.
5.      COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING, DESIGN, ART AND 
TECHNOLOGY (DIPLOMA REQUIREMENTS)
5.1 a.   B.Sc. (Civil Engineering) (CIV)
b.   BSc. (Electrical Engineering) (ELE)
c.   B.Sc. (Mechanical Engineering) (MEC)
Holders of an Ordinary Technical Diploma or its equivalent Applicants should have 
obtained at least a Credit Class Diploma with at least a Credit Pass in Mathematics.
[[page:46]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
42
5.2      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN LAND SURVEYING AND 
GEOMATICS (LSG)
A Diploma from recognised Institutions specialising in Surveying, Physical 
Planning and Civil Engineering. 
Applicants must have received an overall average of 60%in all the years 
and an average of 70%in all Mathematics examinations. 
5.3      BACHELOR OF ARCHITECTURE (ARC)
Holders of Uganda National Examinations Board Ordinary Technical 
Diploma in Architectural Draughtsmanship or its equivalent from 
recognised Institutions.
Applicants should have obtained a Credit Class Diploma and passed with 
at least a Credit in all the subjects in building construction, drawing and 
Mathematics.
5.4      BACHELOR OF URBAN AND REGIONAL PLANNING
An Ordinary Diploma in Building Construction, Civil Engineering or its 
equivalent. 
Applicants should have at least a Credit Class Diploma and should have 
done Mathematics, Building Construction and Drawing with at least Credit 
4 (four).
5.5 BACHELOR OF URBAN AND REGIONAL PLANNING (BUP) –
PRIVATE SPONSORSHIP
5.5.1 Diploma Holders
Holds a diploma (with Credit level pass) recognized by the University 
or its Equivalent in Physical/Urban/City/Town Planning, Architectural 
Draughtsman, Technical Drawing, Civil Engineering, Surveying, 
Construction Management, Land Use Planning as well as Urban 
governance and management.     
5.5.2 Degree Holders 
Holds a First Class, Second Class Honors (Upper division) degree (or 
equivalent) in any related area of study from a recognized University. 
Those with second class – Lower can qualify if they have at least one year 
of working experience in the physical planning field and can demonstrate 
career growth.
[[page:47]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
43
5.6     BACHELOR OF INDUSTRIAL ARTS AND APPLIED DESIGN 
(BID)
Applicants should possess at least a second class (lower division) Diploma 
in Product design and development and Art and Design-related disciplines 
from a recognized institution.
5.7    BACHELOR OF FINE ART (BFA)
For admission under this scheme, a candidate should possess atleast 
a class two diploma from a recognized institution (after obtaining an 
Advanced Level Certificate with a principal pass in Art or after obtaining a 
two year certificate in Art and Design from a recognized institution). 
5.8  BACHELOR OF VISUAL COMMUNICATION, DESIGN AND 
MUL TIMEDIA (BVCDM)
5.8.1  Diploma Holders
For admission under this scheme, a candidate should possess a 
Diploma from a recognized institution (after obtaining an advanced 
level certificate) of at least Class II, with Art and, Technical Drawing and 
Computer Graphics as a bias.
5.9  BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN VALUATION (BVL)
5.9.1  Diploma Holders Entry Scheme 
Diploma entry scheme is available for holders of Uganda National 
Examinations Board Ordinary Diploma in Building Construction and Civil 
Engineering or its equivalent. Candidates should have credit class diploma 
and passed Mathematics, Building Construction and Drawing with at least 
credit four
6.  COLLEGE OF BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCES 
(COBAMS)
6.1      BACHELOR OF STATISTICS
EITHER: A Diploma in Statistics (at Intermediate Professional Level) from the 
Eastern Africa Statistical Training Centre, (EASTC) Dar-es-Salaam or its 
equivalent.
OR: Any other Diploma from a recognised Institution with Mathematics as 
a major subject.
 A candidate who is a holder of a Diploma of at least Credit grading obtained 
at the Eastern Africa Statistical Training Centre, (EASTC) Dar es Salaam, will 
on admission to the Bachelor of Statistics Programme, be exempted from
[[page:48]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
44
the first year and will thus enter the programme in the second year. The 
holders of Pass Diplomas may be admitted to Bachelor of Statistics, Year 1.
6.2      BACHELOR OF  ECONOMICS(ECO)
A Credit Diploma from a recognised Institution in relevant fields/subjects 
(Economics, Mathematics)
6.3    BACHELOR OF COMMERCE (COE)
6.3.1 Diploma holders;
A candidate shall be admitted to the Bachelor of Commerce degree Day/Evening 
Program if she/he has obtained at least a Second Class Diploma in Business 
Administration, Uganda Diploma in Business Studies, Diploma in Accounting, 
Diploma in Finance, Diploma in Local Government Finance and Diploma in 
Economics or Statistics from a recognized institution of higher learning and 
Accounting Technicians Diploma offered by the Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants of Uganda.
6.4 BACHELOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION (ADM)
6.4.1  Diploma Holders:
Must possess at least second class Diploma in relevant areas of business and 
management from recognized institutions.
6.4.2  Degree Holders:  
Must possess at least second class Degree in other fields from a recognised 
University. 
6.5 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN QUANTITATIVE ECONOMICS 
(BQE)
A Credit Diploma from a recognised Institution in relevant fields/subjects 
(Mathematics, Economics).
6.6 BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN POPULATION STUDIES (BPS)
6.6.1  Diploma Entry Scheme 
An applicant must have obtained a credit class or at least second-class diploma 
from an Institution recognised by Makerere University. 
6.6.2  Degree Holders’ scheme 
Under this scheme, an applicant should have obtained at least a second class 
lower to be admitted to the Bachelor of Science in Population studies.
[[page:49]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
45
6.7    BACHELOR OF COMMERCE (EXTERNAL) COX – PRIVATE 
SPONSORSHIP
A candidate shall be admitted to the Bachelor of Commerce degree Day/Evening 
Program if she/he has obtained at least a Second Class Diploma in Business 
Administration, Uganda Diploma in Business Studies, Diploma in Accounting, 
Diploma in Finance, Diploma in Local Government Finance and Diploma in 
Economics or Statistics from a recognized institution of higher learning and 
Accounting Technicians Diploma offered by the Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants of Uganda.
6.8  BACHELOR OF SCIENCE ACTUARIAL SCIENCE (BSAS)
6.8.1  Diploma Holders:
A candidate must have obtained a Diploma with at least a Second Class from a 
recognized institution of higher learning. The Diploma or Certificate programme 
must have involved Mathematics as a major subject.
6.8.2  Degree Holders
A candidate must have obtained a numerical degree with at least a Second Class 
from a recognized institution of higher learning. The degree must have involved 
Mathematics as a major subject.
7.       COLLEGE OF HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES 
(CHUSS)
7.1      Bachelor of Arts (Arts) (ARS)
 Any Credit Diploma from a recognised / chartered Institution. 
7.2      Bachelor of Journalism and Communication
7.2.1   Diploma Holders’ Entry Scheme
A candidate shall be admitted to the BJC under the Diploma Holders Scheme if 
he/she holds at least a second-class diploma in the fields of journalism, media, 
communication or any related field from an institution recognised by Makerere 
University. 
7.2.2  Degree Holders’ Scheme 
Under this scheme, applicants are required to possess a first degree from a 
chartered institution.
[[page:50]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
46
7.3      Bachelor of Arts in Music (MUS)
7.3.1  Diploma Holders Scheme 
The app licant must hold at least a second-class diploma from a recognised 
institution in any field or discipline. However, the programme offers two strands: 
1) Advanced Music strand for students with prior music education at a level of 
either a Diploma in Performing Arts, majoring in music, or a Diploma in Music or 
their equivalents from chartered and recognised institutions of higher learning; 2) 
Community and Popular Music strand for all students who have not had any prior 
music education up to the levels mentioned above. 
7.3.2  Degree Holders
 The applicant must hold  at least a lower second first degree in any field from a 
chartered and recognised institution of higher learning, and if he or she holds a 
pass degree, he/she must have professional experience in any field in music of not 
less than 2 years.
7.4   BACHELOR OF APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY (APS)
At least a second class diploma from a recognized institution
Degree Holders: The applicant should be a Graduate from a recognised chartered 
university.
8.       COLLEGE OF NATURAL SCIENCES (CONAS)
8.1      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE (SCP , SCB, SEC)
(a)      A Credit Diploma in Education from National Teachers Colleges.
 The applicants must have studied any of the following subjects:
 Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, Economics, Physics, Geography or 
Agriculture.
(b) At least an Ordinary Credit Diploma from the UTCs and   recognised 
Institutions
 The applicants must have studied any of the following subjects:
 Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry.
(c)     A Credit Diploma from any of the following Agricultural Colleges:
 Arapai, Nyabyeya, Fisheries Training Institute Entebbe, 
 Bukalasa, Busitema, Veterinary Training Institute- Entebbe.
 The candidates should have studied any of the following subjects: 
Agriculture, Biology.
[[page:51]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
47
(d)    A Credit Diploma from any of the Schools of Health (Medicine) 
Radiographers, Dispensers, Nurses, Medical Laboratory Technicians or 
Environmental Health Officers.
8.2      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY (BIC)
a)     An Ordinary Credit Diploma from UTCs and recognised
 Technical Colleges with qualifications in Chemistry and Mathematics 
or related fields.
b) A Credit Diploma in Education with Chemistry and either Mathematics 
or Physics.
8.3      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY
Relevant Second Class Diploma from recognised Institutions in the following 
areas:
i)     Biotechnology 
ii)    Biology
iii)   Agriculture
iv)   Biomedical Sciences
8.4      BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN FISHERIES AND AQUACUL TURE
At least a Second Class or Credit Diploma in Fisheries Management and Technology, 
Aquaculture Yacht and Boat Building, Veterinary Sciences or the equivalent from 
recognised Institutions.
8.5      BACHELOR OF SPORTS SCIENCE (EXERCISE SCIENCE -SPS 
AND SPORTS MANAGEMENT -SSM)
 8.5.1 Diploma Holders
 Applicants with a diploma of second-class division or its equivalent 
classification from institutions recognized by the Makerere University Senate/
National Council for Higher Education may apply. However, applicants to the 
Exercise Science track should be from the fields of physical education, sport 
and medical studies and any other relevant as determined by the Board.
8.5.2 Degree Holders
 Applicants with a Degree from institutions recognized by the Makerere 
University Senate /National Council for Higher Education may apply for 
admission to Bachelors of Sports Science. However, only applicants with a 
Degree from the Science background may apply to the exercise science and 
any other relevant as determined by the Board.
[[page:52]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
48
8.6   Bachelor of Science in Conservation Biology (BCB)
 At least a Second Class or Credit Diploma from recognised Institutions 
with a bias in Biology, Chemistry, Forestry, Wildlife, Animal Husbandry, and 
Environmental Management
8.7   Bachelor of Science in Petroleum Geosciences and 
Production (BPG)
 The applicant must have obtained at least a Second Class or Credit Diploma 
in Science based disciplines with a bias either, in Physics, Chemistry or 
Mathematics or a Higher Diploma in Engineering and /or Geo-sciences.
8.8    Bachelor of Science (External) (SCX) – Private Sponsorship
8.8.1 Diploma Holders’ Scheme
For a candidate to be admitted via the diploma entry scheme, he/she 
must:
Be selected from the categories specified below and must meet the requirements 
for each category as indicated:
(a)     National Teachers’ Colleges
i.  Must have at least a second-class diploma.
ii.  Must have studied any of the following subjects: Mathematics, 
Biology, Chemistry, Economics, Physics, Geography, or Agriculture.
(b)   Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo and UTCs
i.  Must have a Higher National Diploma with Credit.
ii.  And have qualified in any of the following areas: Mathematics, 
Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
(c)  Agricultural Colleges (Arapai, Nyapea, Fisheries Training Institute 
Entebbe, Bukalasa, Busitema, Veterinary Training Institute.)
i.  Must have at least a second-class diploma.
ii.  And have training in the following areas: Agriculture, Biology.
(d)   School of Health Sciences
The following: Radiographers, Dispensers, Nurses, Medical Laboratory  
Technicians or Environmental Health Officers.
[[page:53]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
49
(e) Those with training in the following related areas: Physics, Biology, 
and Chemistry.
8.8.2 Degree Holders’ Scheme
i.  Must be a degree holder from a recognized/accredited/chartered 
university/institution.
ii.  The degree must have covered the Science that shall enable the 
applicant to choose any two of the following BSc subjects: Botany, 
Zoology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics, Computer Science, 
Geology, Biochemistry and Exercise Science.
9.  COLLEGE OF EDUCATION AND EXTERNAL STUDIES 
(DIPLOMA REQUIREMENTS)
9.1      Bachelor of Adult and Community Education up to (30% of the 
intake). At least a Credit diploma in the following areas:
i)         Diploma in Adult Education
ii)       Diploma in Social Development
iii)      Diploma in Co-operatives
iv)      Diploma in Public Health
iv) Diploma in Animal Husbandry
 vi)     Diploma in Fisheries
v) Diploma in Commonwealth Youth Programme
viii)    Diploma in Project Planning and Management 
ix)     Diploma in Education
x)       Diploma in Guidance and Counselling
 NB: Applicants with Credit Diplomas in Adult and Community Education 
from recognised Institutions will be exempted from the First year of study.
9.2  BACHELOR OF EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND EDUCATION 
(BEY)
Applicants should have obtained at least a Credit (Second-Class) Diploma 
in EITHER Early Childhood Care and Education (DECE) OR Primary 
Education (DPTE) from a recognized institution. In addition, applicants 
under this scheme should have obtained a Certificate in Early Childhood 
Education (CEC) OR a Grade III Teachers’ Certificate, OR a Uganda Advanced 
Certificate of Education (UACE) with at least one Principal Pass.
[[page:54]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
50
10. SCHOOL OF LAW
10.1   Bachelor of Laws
Any Credit Diploma from a recognised Institution of Higher Learning.
All applicants intending to pursue Bachelor of Laws at Makerere University will be 
required to make two applications as follows:
a) Application to sit the Bachelor of Laws Pre-Entry Examination
b) Application for admission into the Bachelor of Laws Degree Programme
  All applicants for Bachelor of Laws will be required to sit and pass the 
Pre-entry examination set by Makerere University.
6. REQUIREMENTS FOR PRE-ENTRY/ SPECIAL 
EXAMINATION
Guidelines for conducting the Law Pre-Entry Examinations.
Eligibility to sit the Entrance Examination
Applicants must possess the minimum admission requirements of the University 
and also any one of the following specific requirement:
(a) `O’ Level Certificate (UCE) or its equivalent with at least 5 Passes and ‘A’ 
Level Certificate (UACE) or its equivalent having obtained a minimum 
of 13 (none weighted) points (for Males) and 12 points (for Females) in 
any ‘A’-Level subject combination for both Humanities and Sciences. 
Candidates who sat `A’ Level before 2013 should have 15 and 14 points 
for male and female Applicants respectively;
(b) A’-Level Female Applicants shall be accorded the 1.5 points (affirmative 
action) before assessing the Applicants who qualify to sit the pre-entry 
examination.
(c) Diploma Holders who possess at least a Second Class or Credit Level 
Diploma from a recognized Institution. 
(d) All applicants nominated or under consideration on the following 
special entry schemes:
(i) Persons with Disability
(ii) Sports Scheme
(e) Degree Holders who are graduates in any discipline from a chartered 
University.
(f ) Mature Age Examinations candidates seeking admission into Bachelor 
of Laws.Funding for Entrance Examination
[[page:55]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
51
 An application fee shall be charged for Entrance Examination expenses. 
The Fee will cover the following:
i)        Handling of Application (short listing and documentation)
ii)       Setting the examination(s)
iii)      Invigilation of the examination(s)
iv)      Marking of Examinations
 v)      Stationery
vi)      Administration expenses
Examination Process (setting, marking, issuing results)
i)         The Senate Mature-Age Committee shall be responsible for devising 
mechanisms to ensure the security and integrity of the examinations;
ii) Confidential official channels shall be used to identify Entrance 
examination setters and   markers with the help of Deans and Directors 
of relevant academic Units. The Academic Registrar shall appoint a setter 
with an assistant for a three-(3) year period;
iii)      Identified examiners shall serve for a period not exceeding three (3) years 
consecutive; the setting shall cover and required competencies in the 
following areas:
a)    Aptitude and analytical skills
b)    Comprehension skills
c)    Communication skills
d)     General knowledge on contemporary issues – development, politics,  
economics, technology etc.
i)      Examination moderation will be done at academic unit level by similarly 
designated staff;
ii)     To avoid leakage, examinations with apparent errors shall not be 
discussed after moderation has been done;
iii) Moderated examination questions shall be sealed in clearly labeled 
envelopes and submitted to the Academic Registrar for safe storage in 
the Question Bank. Each subject section shall have its Question Bank or a 
section thereof;
iv) The examination questions shall be submitted along with moderated 
marking guides enclosed  in separate envelopes with appropriate labels 
for ease of identification during later processes;
v) Marking of all Entrance examination shall be done in groups and at a 
centralized venue not  easily accessible to the public;
vi)      Entrance examinations shall be set and marked by designated academic 
staff at the rank of  Lecturer or equivalent;
[[page:56]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
52
vii) The Mature Age Committee shall, annually designate persons (a team 
to be determined by the  Committee) to be in charge of assembling, 
printing and distributing Entrance Examination;
viii) Results shall be compiled by a team designated by the Mature Age 
Committee;
ix)      The Mature Age Committee shall approve Persons to perform the role of  
Invigilators;
x)       Designated members of the Mature Age Committee shall verify the 
Marked scripts to ensure consistency and integrity of the process;
xi) The Mature Age Entrance Section Committee shall receive compiled 
results and consider them for  purposes of   approval before they are 
publicly displayed, albeit with names concealed;
xii) The Head, Quality Assurance Unit shall receive annual reports on the 
conduct of Entrance  examination;
xiii) The Pre-Entry Committee may call upon members of University staff to 
support in the invigilation;
xiv)     The Pre-Entry examination shall be treated like any University 
examination. The general rules and regulations regarding University 
examinations shall apply to the examination.
 How the Entrance Examination shall guide selection of eligible 
candidates?
The results of the pre-entry examination shall be the sole criteria for admission to 
Bachelor of Laws with effect from 2012/2013 academic year. The ‘A’ level results 
and other relevant qualifications provided for under eligibility (2.0) in above will 
determine eligibility to sit the pre-entry examination. 
Dates for Examination
The examinations will be sat after release of ‘A’ level results. This will enable the 
candidates to be considered for the merit intake that takes.
Special University Entry Examination for Diploma Programmes Under the Special 
University Entry for Diploma Programmes scheme, the following are the major 
policies;
a)       For a candidate to qualify for entry into the University for the following 
Diploma programmes, he/she MUST sit and pass the University Special 
Entry    examinations;
 i)     Diploma in Performing Arts
b) To be eligible to sit the Special University Entry Examinations for the 
above Diploma programmes (a-g), the candidate MUST possess an 
Ordinary Level Certificate of Education (UCE) or Equivalent with at least 
five (5) passes obtained at the same sitting.
[[page:57]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
53
 MAKERERE UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL (MUBS)
 Admission requirements to the following degree programmes 
through Degree/Diploma Holders’ Entry Scheme at MUBS for 
2025/2026 Academic Y ear;
NOTE: Candidates who possess a Pass Diploma shall not be admitted to any programme
Programme Requirements
11.1 Bachelor of 
Commerce
•  A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma in a business related discipline from a recognized 
institution. in one of the following disciplines; Accounting 
and Finance, Business Administration, National Diploma in 
Accountancy, National Diploma in Business Management 
or any other business diploma and must have passed 
Mathematics with at least a credit at O’level 
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study because the programme is highly specialized.
11.2 Bachelor of Science in 
Accounting
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in one of the following 
disciplines; Accounting and Finance, Diploma in Business 
Management. National Diploma in Accountancy, National 
Diploma in Business Administration or any other business 
diploma and must have passed Mathematics with at least a 
credit at O’level 
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study because the programme is highly specialized.
11.3 Bachelor of Arts in 
Economics
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in one of the following 
disciplines; Accounting and Finance, Business Administration, 
Procurement and Supply Chain Management
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study because the programme is highly specialized.
11.4 Bachelor of Business 
Statistics
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in one of the following 
disciplines; Accounting and Finance, Business Administration, 
Diploma in Education, Diploma in Engineering, Diploma in 
Statistics and any other relevant with Mathematics and or 
Statistics.
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study because the programme is highly specialized.
[[page:58]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
54
11.5 Bachelor of Science in 
Finance
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma in a business Administration, Diploma in Accounting 
and Finance, Diploma in Cooperatives diploma in Business 
Administration, National Diploma in Accountancy, National 
Diploma in Business Management, Diploma in Business 
Computing or any other business diploma from a recognized 
institution and must have passed Mathematics with at least 
a credit at O’ level.
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study because the programme is highly specialized.
11.6 Bachelor of 
Real Estate Business 
Management
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in the following 
disciplines Diploma in Business Administration, Diploma 
in Accounting and Finance, National Diploma in Business 
Management, Diploma in Procurement and Logistics related 
discipline from a recognized institution and must have 
passed Mathematics with a credit at O’level. 
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study because the programme is highly specialized.
11.7 Bachelor of Business 
Administration
• A candidate must possess at least a second class/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution.
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a first class division from Makerere University 
Business School within the three years back period i.e. 
2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of application, 
shall be admitted to the second year of study.
• Candidates, who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a second class, shall be admitted to the first year 
of study.
11.8 Bachelor of Leisure, 
Events and Hotel 
Management
• A candidate must hold at least credit or second class 
diploma in leisure, events, hotel catering, entertainment, 
tourism and other hospitality related disciplines from a 
recognized institution.
• Candidates holding a first class diploma in the above areas 
from a recognized institution can apply to be admitted to 
2nd year.
11.9 Bachelor of 
Leadership and 
Governance
• A candidate must possess at least a second class/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution.
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a second class lower division from Makerere 
University Business School within the three years back 
period i.e. 2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of 
application, shall be admitted to the second year of study.
[[page:59]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
55
11.10 Bachelor of 
Transport and Logistics 
Management
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma from a recognized institution.
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study.
11.11 Bachelor of Business 
Computing
A candidate must possess at least a second class lower/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution.
11.12 Bachelor of Human 
Resource Management
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a second class lower division from Makerere 
University Business School within the three years back 
period i.e. 2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of 
application, shall be admitted to the second year of study.
11.13 Bachelor of 
Office and Information 
Management
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a second class lower division from Makerere 
University Business School within the three years back 
period i.e. 2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of 
application, shall be admitted to the second year of study.
11.14 Bachelor of  
Marketing
• A candidate must possess at least a second class/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in the following 
disciplines; Selling & Marketing, Business Administration, 
Marketing
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a second class upper division from Makerere 
University Business School within the three years back 
period i.e. 2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of 
application, shall be admitted to the second year of study.
Candidates, who completed their Diploma programmes with 
at least a second class lower, shall be admitted to the first 
year of study.
11.15 Bachelor of 
Entrepreneurship 
• A candidate must possess at least a second class /credit 
diploma from a recognized institution.
• Applicants to this programme shall be admitted to the first 
year of study.
11.16 Bachelor of 
Procurement & Supply 
Chain Management
• A candidate must possess at least a second class/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in the following 
disciplines; Procurement & Logistics Management, Business 
Administration, Accounting & Finance
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programme in 
Procurement & Logistics with at least a second class lower 
division from Makerere University Business School within 
the three years back period i.e. 2022/2023, 2023/2024, 
2024/2025, at the time of application, shall be admitted to 
the second year of study.
[[page:60]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
56
11.17 Bachelor of Travel 
and Tourism Management
• A candidate must possess at least a second class/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution.
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes 
with at least a first class division from Makerere University 
Business School within the three years back period i.e. 
2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of application, 
shall be admitted to the second year of study.
• Candidates who possess a Second class Diploma in the 
relevant field shall be admitted to the First year of study.
11.18 Bachelor of 
International Business
• A candidate must possess at least a second class/credit 
diploma from a recognized institution in the following 
disciplines; Sales & Marketing, Business Administration, 
Accounting & Finance, Purchasing & Procurement.
• Candidates who completed their Diploma programmes with 
at least a first class or second class division from Makerere 
University Business School within the three years back 
period i.e. 2022/2023, 2023/2024, 2024/2025, at the time of 
application, shall be admitted to the first year of study.
 Admission requirements to degree programmes through Professional 
qualifications at MUBS
Programme Requirements
Bachelor of 
Commerce
Bachelor of Science 
in Accounting
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- ACCA, CPA, CIM, CIPS, ICSA, CFA, CIA and CILT shall 
be admitted to first year of study.
Bachelor of Arts in 
Economics
Bachelor of Real 
Estate Business Mgt
Bachelor of Science 
in Finance
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- ACCA, CIM, CIPS, ICSA,CPA and passed Mathematics 
with a credit at O’level or principal  pass at A’level shall be admitted 
to first year of study.
Bachelor of Business 
Statistics
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- ACCA, CIM, CIPS, ICSA, CPA, CIMA, CFA, CGMA and 
CISA shall be admitted to first year of study.
Bachelor of Business 
Administration
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- ACCA, CIM, CIPS, ICSA,CPA and passed Mathematics 
with a credit at O’level or principal  pass at A’level shall be admitted 
to first year of study.
[[page:61]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
57
Bachelor of Leisure, 
Events and Hotel 
Management
Candidates who completed level/part two of leisure, events, hotel, 
Catering, Entertainment, Tourism and other hospitality related 
professional qualifications shall be admitted to first year of study.
Bachelor of 
Entrepreneurship
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- ACCA, CIPD, CIPS, CPA, CIM, PMP and CISA shall be 
admitted to first year of study.
Bachelor of Business 
Computing
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- OCP and MSCE shall be admitted to first year of 
study.
Bachelor of 
Transport  
and Logistics 
Management
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- CIPS, CILT, CIM, CPA and ACCA shall be admitted to 
first year of study.
Bachelor of 
Procurement  and 
Supply Chain 
Management
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification: - CIPS, CILT, CIM and ACCA shall be admitted to first 
year of study.
Bachelor of Travel 
and Tourism 
Management
Candidates who completed level/part two of Travel and Tourism 
and any relevant professional qualification from a recognized 
institution such as IATA Diploma shall be admitted to first year of 
study.
Bachelor of Office 
and Information 
Management
Candidates who completed level/part one of any relevant 
professional qualification shall be admitted to first year of study
Bachelor of 
Leadership and 
Governance
Candidates who completed level/part two of any relevant 
professional qualification shall be admitted to first year of study
Bachelor of 
Human Resource 
Management
Candidates who completed level/part two CIPD professional 
qualification shall be admitted to first year of study
Bachelor of 
International  
Business 
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualifications:-CITP , Institute of Export and International Trade, 
Professional Diploma/Certificate in International Business Studies 
and other professional qualifications in Marketing, Maritime 
Studies as well as Advertising and Public Relations, shall be 
admitted to first year of study.
Bachelor of Science 
in Marketing
Candidates who completed level/part two of these professional 
qualification:- CIM, CITP , Institute of Export & International Trade 
and any other professional qualification in Marketing or Business 
Management, shall be admitted to first year of study.
[[page:62]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
58
7. ADMISSION UNDER TRANSFER OF CREDIT 
Guidelines for Transfer of Credit Units 
Applicants who wish to transfer from other recognized Universities or equivalent 
Institute of Higher Learning to Makerere University shall have the following 
requirements;
(a) MUST satisfy the admission requirements and be within the Cut-off  
Points or meet the requirements for the Academic Programmes applied 
for, at the time when they would have joined Makerere University in 
the first year. 
(b) Must obtain and submit an official academic Transcript (s) and 
Certificate from the University/institution of Higher learning in which 
he/she was previously enrolled indicating his/her academic status, 
the courses offered/ taken, the credit units completed and the grades 
obtained in each course. 
(c) Must have obtained the equivalent of Cumulative Grade Point Average 
of at least 3.0.
(d) Will be permitted to transfer to Makerere University Credits earned 
but the maximum number of Credits should not exceed 60% of the 
minimum graduation load of the academic programme applied for. 
(e) If permitted to transfer she/he should not be allowed to transfer the 
equivalent of credit units in a course in which she/he obtained a Grade 
point which was lower than 2.0.
(f ) An application must be accompanied by recommendations from the 
Institution’s Authority that she/he is seeking to transfer from.
Transfer of Credit Units Earned through Study Exchange Programme
(a) There must be a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) or a 
cooperative agreement between Makerere University and the other 
institution where the study exchange programme is conducted.
(b) The School/ Department Academic Boards of Makerere must approve 
the credits earned.
(c) The Departments/School academic boards shall harmonise credits 
transferred by fitting or equating them to the Makerere University 
course curricula and credit unit system.
(d) Without prejudice to the requirement of the above subsection (a), 
candidates who are duly admitted to a new programme at Makerere 
University may apply for transfer of credit earned from a similar 
or related programme offered at Makerere University under these 
provisions.
(e) The following guidelines and procedure will apply for credit transfers:
[[page:63]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
59
(i) An applicant seeking transfer of credit should have completed at least a 
year of two semesters from a chartered and recognized university.  
(ii) An Applicant will be permitted to transfer to Makerere University Credits 
earned but the maximum of Credits should not exceed 60% of the 
minimum graduation load of the academic programme applied for. 
(iii) An applicant may seek to transfer credit from courses taken in another 
institution. 
(iv) Transfer of credits and exemption of courses is permissible only for 
courses that were sat for in a period that does not exceed Five (5) years 
prior to the Application.
(v) Credit transfer for any course shall be equated/harmonised with Makerere 
University grading system.
Re-admission after being discontinued due to weak academic 
performance
a) A student who has been discontinued from studies because of weak 
academic performance may be permitted to re-apply to another 
Programme and compete with other Applicants for re-admission into 
first year.
b) A student who applies and obtains re-admission after being 
discontinued due to weak academic performance will not be permitted 
to transfer Credits earned from previous Academic Programmes.
c) A student who was discontinued or dismissed from his/her studies 
because of examination irregularities shall not be considered for re-
admission.
[[page:64]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
60
INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
[[page:65]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
61
Eligibility
Makerere University welcomes international students who satisfy the minimum 
entry requirements indicated below:
A- Level
Applicants should note that to be eligible for admission, the last examination 
must have been sat during the year in which admission is being sought or not 
more than two years previously.
At its discretion and on the advice of the School College concerned, the University 
may consider for admission to a Degree Programme a candidate with only ‘O’ level 
qualifications provided that he/she has been registered at another University 
(Prior to applying), for a Degree Programme and has successfully completed 
at least one year of University education. He/she must however, submit the 
University transcript(s).
The requirements described above are only minimum academic requirements for 
admission into the University. There is no guarantee that fulfillment of them will 
automatically make one entitled to admission into the University. The possession 
of the minimum entry qualifications only makes one eligible for consideration for 
admission.
Application Procedure
The University Academic Year normally starts in August. Applications should 
be sent to Academic Registrar (Admissions), P .O. Box 7062, K ampala, Uganda. 
Applicants should visit Makererere University Website www.mak.ac.ug and later, 
the application portal; www.apply.mak.ac.ug to know the admission requirements 
and make the application respectively.
The completed application, together with other relevant academic documents 
and the necessary application fee should be received by the Admissions Office 
effective 31st March to 31st May of the Year in which admission is sought.
 N.B: Applications cannot be processed until the University has received the 
application fee and undertaking by the sponsor to finance the student’s studies at this 
University.
English Proficiency
Candidates from countries where the language of instruction is not English are 
required to supply evidence of Proficiency in English. Foreign Applicants currently 
residing in Uganda may however, sit an English proficiency test conducted by 
Makerere University.
Makerere University welcomes International Students who satisfy the minimum
[[page:66]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
62
entry requirements (see weighting system for Advanced Level/Equivalent, 
Diploma holders, Degree Holders’ applicants respectively at www.mak.ac.ug).
Guidelines Applicable to International Students
(i) Applicants with academic documents prescribed in other languages 
other than English should submit the said documents for translation to 
the School of Languages at chuss.clcs@mak.ac.ug, Makerere University. 
The translation shall be from such language into English at the Applicant’s 
cost.
ii) Applicants who obtained qualifications elsewhere outside Uganda 
should take their secondary school academic documents or their 
equivalent to Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) for purposes 
of being equated to Ugandan grades.
iii) Completed forms should be returned to Undergraduate Admissions 
office, and the following documents MUST be attached to the application 
form:
a)    Original Pay in slip from the Bank
b)    One Passport size photograph of the applicants’ current likeness
c)     Photocopies of Secondary School Certificates (i e Ordinary Level and 
Advanced Level) or its equivalent.
vii) Diploma/Degree holder’s applicants MUST attach certified photocopies 
of their academic transcripts issued by the awarding institutions.
viii) Applicants from countries where the language of instruction is not 
English are required to bring evidence of proficiency of English. However, 
Makerere University (School of Languages) conducts proficiency tests on 
request.
ix)  Applicants wishing to be admitted to the Bachelor of Laws 
programme offered by Makerere University are required to take a 
pre-entry examination.
x) International students MUST present a health insurance certificates 
from a reputable insurance firm at the time of admission. So, the 
insurance firm should cater for any eventuality not Makerere 
University.
[[page:67]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
63
THE SHORT-TERM STUDENTSHIP SCHEME
The Short-Term Studentship Scheme caters for students who come to Makerere 
from other recognized universities.
1.     OBJECTIVES
a)     To improve of knowledge base of the students
b)     To enable a student to acquire more knowledge through experiential 
learning in a different environment
2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
a)     Studying under scheme does not lead to any award
b) Candidates who apply for admission under the scheme should not 
already be Makerere University Students
c) Registered Short-Term students shall not transfer to degree 
programmes or change status of registration on the basis of their 
performance while on the scheme.
d)  The Short-term students’ scheme applies to both the Undergraduate 
and Postgraduate students. 
3.      ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
  Applicants under the scheme MUST:
a)       Be students of other recognised Universities or
b)       Possess the Makerere University admission requirements.
4.      APPLICATION FOR, AND DURATION OF , REGISTRATION
a)  Short-Term student is one whose duration of studentship at the 
University is at least one semester and who is not at the time of 
application and studies registered for the certificate, diploma or 
degree programme of Makerere University.
b) Students of other institutions should apply through the Heads of such 
institutions.
c) Applications must be submitted to the University not later than 31st
[[page:68]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
64
May of the year in which admission is sought.
d) Registration for short-term studentship shall be at the beginning 
of each semester like regular students on Makerere University 
Programme, unless otherwise specified.
e) Short-term students are required to register as students of the 
University for one full academic year to any year of study as long as 
they meet the prerequisites. As registered students, all regulations 
governing full time students will apply to them unless otherwise 
stated. The tuition fees, charged per semester shall be paid before each 
student is registered.
f )      Short-term studentship may be terminated on the following grounds; 
serious breach of university regulations, abscondment and/or irregular 
attendance of classes.
5.      EXAMINATIONS AND AWARDS
a) Such registration shall not lead to any award of the University, unless 
otherwise decided by Senate.
b) At the end of the academic year/semester, short-term students have to 
sit University examinations under the same regulations as the full time 
University students.
c) Short-Term student may audit any course at the University by 
permission and provided they have registered in at least one course. 
All audited courses must be paid for at the prevailing University rates
[[page:69]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
65
THE OCCASIONAL STUDENTSHIP SCHEME
1.      OBJECTIVE
a)       Improvement of knowledge base of students
b)       To enable a student to acquire more knowledge through experiential  
   learning in a different environment
2.      GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
a)     Studying under the scheme does not lead to any award
b) Candidates who apply for admission under the scheme should not 
already     be Makerere University students.
c) Registered Occasional students shall not transfer to degree 
programmes or change status of registration on the basis of their 
performance while on the scheme
d) The Occasional Studentship Scheme applies to both the Undergraduate 
and Postgraduate Programmes. 
3.      ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applicants under the scheme MUST be:
a)       Students of other recognised Universities and
b)       Possess the Makerere University minimum admission requirement
4.      APPLICATION FOR, AND DURATION OF , REGISTRATION
a) S tudents of other institutions should apply through the Heads of their 
institutions.
b) Candidates may apply for registration at any time and could be 
admitted at the beginning of any semester of the academic year.
c) All applications must be addressed to the Registrar who shall, in 
consultation with relevant bodies within the University, register such 
students.
d) Occasional student must register for at least one course in a semester
[[page:70]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
66
and for not more than one academic year.
e) All applicants must complete an application form. They should specify 
the courses they wish to attend with the respective Deans/Directors 
of Faculties/Institutes/School. The completed application form 
should finally be submitted to the Academic Registrar who shall, in 
consultation with relevant bodies within the University, register such 
student.
5.      EXAMINATIONS AND AWARDS
a) Occasional students shall not sit for University Examination.
b) The University shall not enter into negotiations, on behalf of an 
occasional student, for purposes of getting agreements with another 
University on the crediting of the student’s work covered during his 
registration although the University shall provide a statement of 
attendance/results on request.
6.      UNIVERSITY RULES, FEES, AND RESIDENCE  
a) Occasional students as well as regular students are expected to adhere 
to the University, and Faculty Rules and Regulations, with which they 
should make themselves familiar, at once, on arrival.
b) The tuition fees, charged per semester should be paid before the 
student is registered.
c)     No occasional student shall be entitled to residential accommodation 
provided by the University and shall also not be involved in making 
alternative arrangements for the student. Also be expected to 
have access to a laptop and e-book reader for the duration of the 
programme.
[[page:71]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
67
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY FEES POLICY 
A. P OLICY STATEMENT 
 Ma kerere University is committed to providing the best service to her 
students to ensure that they get the best higher education experience 
from the University. In order to achieve this, the University raises financial 
resources from different sources, including tuition and functional fees, 
charges for use of University facilities, endowments and donations. Tuition 
and functional fees payable by students form an important component of 
the University’s financial resources.
B.  LEGAL FRAMEWORK
Fees payable by students shall be fixed by the University Council in accordance 
with article 41(c) of the Universities and Other Institutions Act (UOTIA) of 2001 as 
amended and may be reviewed from time to time. 
C.  OBJECTIVES OF THE FEES POLICY
The objective of this policy is to:
1) Ensure the setting fees is compliant with government regulations while 
supporting strategic and financial imperatives
2) Ensure that additional charges levied are compliant with the legal 
requirements while ensuring coverage of legitimate costs
3) Provide clarity regarding the requirements for administration, invoicing, 
collection and refund of fees
D.       SCOPE
This policy applies to all categories of fees chargeable for services to students of 
Makerere University for programmes of study.
E.       GUIDING PRINCIPLES
1.   The University will set tuition fees according to economic and strategic 
considerations.
2. The University will levy fees and charges on students in accordance with legal 
requirements and University regulations.
3.     Fees for tuition are set and charged at different rates for different cohorts 
based citizenship status, level of study and other criteria in accordance with 
the UOTIA 2001 as ammended.
4. The University will publish comprehensive and accessible information on 
fees and charges for students and will ensure that the administration of
[[page:72]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
68
these fees and charges is consistent with the published information and in 
accordance with the legal requirements and University regulations, policies 
and procedures.
5. The University will refund tuition fees or remit HELB debt in accordance with 
legal requirements and University regulations.
6.      The University recognises that students may face financial hardship during 
the course of their studies and provides fees payment options to enable 
eligible students to continue their studies.
F.        CATEGORIES OF FEES
University fees are categorized as tuition, functional and other fees as detailed 
below:
i)        Tuition Fees (payable each ordinary and recess semester)
ii)       Undergraduate Students Functional Fees (payable in the first semester  
of each Academic year)
a)    Registration 
b)    Examination 
c)    Book Bank 
d)    Library
e)    Information and Communication Technology
 f )    Guild
g)    Sports
h)    Identity Card
i)     Medical Capitation
j)     Field attachment supervision
k)    Development
l)     Caution
m)   Endowment 
n)    Research Fee 
iii.  Other Undergraduate Fees (payable as and when required)
a)     Application 
b)     Graduation
c)      Transcript 
d)     Certificate
[[page:73]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
69
d)     Convocation
e)     Certification
f )     Academic Gowns 
g)     Recess Term fee 
h)     Late Registration 
i)     Re-mark Fee
j)     Re-take Fee
k)     Late Fees Payment Fee
l)     Verification Fee
m)   Affiliated Institutions Fee
n)     Any other fees as may be fixed by Council from time to time
G. FEES REGULATIONS
1.         GENERAL PROVISIONS
i) Payment of University fees is the responsibility of students. An account 
shall be opened for each student in the computerized information 
system of the University. Students who default on the payment of fees 
are subject to sanctions, including de-registration, payment of a fine and 
legal action.
ii)     Fees are due on the first day of each semester.
iii)   All students admitted for programmes at the University are personally 
responsible for the payment of fees. This includes arrangements where 
students obtain sponsorship for fees and the sponsor defaults.
iv)    The specific fee applicable is confirmed at the point of admission.
v) When there is a review between admission and registration, the applicable 
fee will be that given to the students at the time of registration.
vi) Students repeating a course unit or programme of study will be charged 
the appropriate fee for the unit or programme for continuing students 
and those who will have overstayed on the programme.
vii)   Students repeating course units or programmes where the fee structure 
has been revised upwards will be charged the revised rates.
viii)  Every student admitted to a programme of study of Makerere University 
shall be required to sign and undertaking regarding fees payment.
[[page:74]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
70
2.      SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
A)       NEW STUDENTS
i) Every student admitted to a programme of study of Makerere University 
will be issued a provisional admission letter with an invoice for payment 
of the requisite fees.
ii) All functional fees and 60% of tuition fees for new joining students must 
be paid before the admission letter is issued.
B)       CONTINUING STUDENTS
Every continuing student is expected to pay fees due on the first day of a semester. 
However, in the event a student is unable to pay full fees on the first day of the 
semester the following conditions shall apply:
i) Every continuing student shall pay a deposit as commitment fee as may 
be fixed by the University Council, provided (at the time of approval of 
this policy the commitment fee shall be UGX 200,000/= (Uganda Shillings 
Two Hundred Thousand only) within the first three weeks of a semester.
ii)     The commitment fee shall form part of fees due for the semester.
iii)   The deadline for payment of minimum deposit is the sixth week of the 
semester
iv)    A surcharge on late payment of minimum deposit as may be fixed by 
council from time to time payable by the sixth week of the semester.
v) Every continuing student will be required to register within three weeks 
of the semester upon which the student shall be billed for that semester
vi)    Students who have not registered by the third week must register by the 
10th week be- yond which a surcharge of 50000/= shall be levied up to 
the 12th week
vii)   Deadline for registration is the 12th week of a semester upon payment of 
late registration fee as may be determined by the University council from 
time to time.
viii)  Students who does not register by the twelfth will be deregistered 
automatically and shall henceforth cease to be a student of Makerere 
University
ix)    A student who registers but fails to pay 100% fees within the twelfth week 
of a semester may be permitted to complete payment of fees by the 15th 
week of a semester with a surcharge of 5% of outstanding balance.
x) A student who fails to pay 100% fees on the first day of a semester shall 
pay 100% fees within the first 12th week of a semester
xi)   A student who may register but fails to pay 100% fees by the 15th week 
of a semester will be deregistered automatically.
[[page:75]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
71
3.      SPECIAL PAYMENT PLANS
a)     Monthly Fees Payment Plan Students who have difficulty paying their 
tuition fees due to financial hardship may apply to pay their tuition 
fee under a monthly payment plan. Students must apply in writing to 
the Vice Chancellor, and provide documentation as evidence of their 
financial hardship. The following conditions will apply: -
a) Applications are reviewed on an individual basis and arranged on a 
per-semester basis only.
b) Payment plans cannot be applied retrospectively and are not available 
to new students. Please note: an administrative fee as may be fixed by 
Council will be charged for the establishment of a fees payment plan.
c) Students who wish to apply for a payment plan arrangement must 
submit a written request/ application no later than the fee payment 
due date for the semester in which they are requesting a payment 
plan.
d) Students permitted to pay by plan will be required to pay a deposit on 
the fees as may be determined by council before the payment plan will 
be approved and the deposit will be included on student’s schedule of 
payments.
e)     The remaining balance will be paid under a monthly payment plan.
f ) All fees must be finalised in accordance with the agreed terms and 
conditions of the individual payment plan and in any case not later 
than the 12th week of the semester.
g) Payment plans will be limited to the semester in which the request is 
made and no further extensions will be granted.
h) There is no interest charge or finance charge (zero percent annual 
percentage rate) imposed for use of the Monthly Payment Plan.
i) Continued participation in the Monthly Payment Plan is contingent 
upon a satisfactory payment history.
j) Makerere University reserves the right to deny continued participation 
to anyone who has previously not complied with the terms of the 
monthly payment plan billing schedule.
C)           PREPAID TUITION PLAN
The University’s Prepaid Tuition Plan allows new students to prepay all the 
semesters in their study plan thereby locking in the rate of tuition in effect at the 
time of the plan’s initiation. Payment must be received before the first semester of 
the student’s study programme. For a copy of the Prepaid Tuition Plan agreement 
that governs this plan, please contact the Bursar’s Office.
[[page:76]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
72
D)       FINANCIAL SUPPORT AND ADVICE
Students who are experiencing unforeseen financial difficulties in paying their 
tuition fees should seek help at the earliest opportunity. The University will assist 
by providing information about possible scholarships where possible. It must be 
noted, however, that payment of fees remains the responsibility of the student.
4.  SPECIAL PROVISION
i) Students Who Have Overstayed on a Programme Continuing students 
who have overstayed on a programme and are repeating a course unit or 
programme of study shall be charged the appropriate fee for the unit or 
programme of study
ii) Students at Affiliated Institutions Fees for students studying for Makerere 
University awards at affiliated institutions will be determined by the 
affiliated institution, provided that functional fees payable directly to 
Makerere University will be the same fees payable by Makerere University 
students.
iii) Students who have approved sponsors shall be liable for any unpaid 
University fees costs if the sponsor defaults on payment in any given 
semester.
iv)      Accommodation Fees Residence fees must be paid before allocation of 
a room.
v)       Other fees:
a) On completion of their programmes of study, students shall pay 
stipulated fees, e.g. certificate, convocation, graduation and academic 
transcript fees.
b) Students shall be required to pay for certification of their documents at 
rates determined by the University Council.
vi) Fees upon Withdrawal and Discontinuation from Studies 
a) Students who withdraw from a programme of study are still liable for 
the fees which they owe to the University.
b) A student who is dismissed for academic or disciplinary reasons, prior 
to the end of semester, shall forfeit all tuition and other fees paid for 
that semester.
vii)      Defaulting Students:
a) Students who default payment of fees, or who are in debt to the 
University for any rea- son, shall not be allowed to write their 
examinations or proceed further with their studies or receive a 
University Transcript, degree or any award.
[[page:77]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
73
b) A student who fails to pay fees within the stipulated period may 
apply for withdraw from the programme and on resumption shall be 
required to pay all the requisite fees.
c) If, with notice, a student’s enrolment is cancelled for abscondment 
from the programme of study and that student is subsequently 
permitted to have his/her enrolment reinstated, a Re-instatement fee 
will be levied in addition to the requisite functional and tuition fees not 
paid by the student at the time of abscondment.
d) Non-payment of fees within the prescribed period shall lead to 
cancellation of registration.
e) A student whose enrolment is cancelled will retain her/his fee liability, 
and re-admission in a subsequent year or semester will only be 
permitted when the debt is paid in.
f ) A student who is in debt to the University will not be permitted to 
graduate shall not be issued with Academic Transcript or partial 
Transcript.
g) The University reserves the right to take legal action, where appropriate, 
to effect recovery of monies from students who leave the University 
with outstanding debts.
h) Transfer of fees from one student’s account to another student’s 
account is not permissible.
5.      PROCEDURE FOR PAYING FEES
The following is the procedure for paying University fees:
i)      Students are invoiced for the fees before the start of the semester.
ii)     Payments are made to an approved Makerere University Bank collection 
account.
iii) Upon confirmation of payment, receipts are issued by the Finance 
Department to students’ after which the student may register on the 
computerized system of the University.
iv)    Upon registration an account is opened and maintained in the 
computerized system of the University for each student.
6.      METHODS OF PAYMENT
Methods of payment of University fees include the following:
i) Cash deposit in a University bank account
 ii)     Bank drafts
iii)    Direct Transfer
[[page:78]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
74
iv)   Other electronic transfer methods as may be approved by University 
Management
7.      FEES SUBSIDY SCHEMES
a) Biological children of members of staff who are less than 21 years 
on entry into the University may be permitted to pay ½ tuition fees 
and full functional fees in accordance with the existing policy on fees 
subsidy for biological children of members of staff.
b)     Members of staff who are on the Staff Development programme on 
programmes offered at Makerere University will have a waiver of the 
tuition and functional fees.
8.      REFUND OF FEES
8.1.     Refund of tuition and functional fees 
Students who choose to withdraw from a programme may be refunded some 
tuition fees as detailed below.
i) A student who has been permitted to withdraw from studies shall be 
refunded the Tuition Fees already paid pro-rata to the equivalent fees 
due for the time spent on the programme of studies. student who has 
been permitted to withdraw from studies shall be refunded the Tuition 
Fees already paid according to the following schedules:
The time at which a student has withdrawn in a semester Percentage of the tuition 
fees already paid to be refunded to thee student
a) By the End of the First Week of a Semester 100%
b) By the End of the Second Week                 80%
c) By the End of the Third Week of a Semester. 60%
d) By the End of the Fourth Week of the Semester 40%
e) By the End of the Fifth Week of a Semester 20%
f) After the Fifth Week  0%
ii)    No tuition fees will be refunded to a student who withdraws from a 
programme of study after the sixth week of the semester or without 
permission.
iii) In case an Academic Programme to which a student has been admitted 
is not conducted in a particular academic year, the University will refund 
the full tuition fees paid by the student.
[[page:79]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
75
iv) All Functional fees (e.g. Fees for Application, Faculty Requirements, field 
attachment, Registration, Examinations, Identity Cards, administrative 
fee and the Guild charges) are non-refundable
v)       Residence fees are non-refundable
8.2.    Payment in excess of statutory fees
Students, who pay more than the University’s tuition and other fees requirement, 
shall be refunded the sum paid beyond the University statutory fee requirements 
to
i)         The student or sponsor upon completion of programme of study
 ii)       Or rolled forward depending on the circumstances.
Any credit resulting from an overpayment or an adjustment/amendment to a 
student’s fee liability will be credited towards her/his fee liability for the following 
semester.
8.3.    Application for Refund
In every case a refund will be made on production of University receipt. Students’ 
written application seeking for the refund shall be verified by the Academic 
Registrar and Bursar before a refund is paid. Application for refund will only be 
approved where the university is satisfied that
a) Circumstances where beyond the students control (and those 
circumstances where unusual, uncommon or abnormal) and
b) The Circumstances did not make their full impact on the student until 
after the census for the course(s) they wish to withdraw from and
c) The Circumstances make it impracticable to complete requirements 
for the course.
8.4.    Forgeries
a) Students who are registered on the basis of forged academic 
documents will not get fees refund.
b) Students who present forged fees payment documents will be 
dismissed from the University and prosecuted.
9.      RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FEES 
POLICY
a) The overall responsibility for implementation of this policy is the Vice 
Chancellor, assisted by the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs) 
and the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Finance and Administration).
b) The operational responsibility for implementation of this policy lies 
with the University Secretary, the Academic Registrar, the Bursar, the
[[page:80]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
76
College Principals, Directors of External Campuses, Deans and Heads 
of Department.
c) Every member of staff has the general responsibility of ensuring that 
this policy is implemented effectively.
10. CHANGE OF FEES RATES
i) Any change of rates of University fees normally affects the intake of that 
year but not Continuing students who will continue paying the rates in 
which they were admitted, until that cohort complete studies;
ii) However, students who overstay in the Academic Programme due to 
withdrawal or those who are required to retake courses will be charged 
the old rates for a period of two years from the date their cohorts 
completed studies. Thereafter, any student who overstays for more than 
two years, will be charged the new rates which are operational from the 
intake of the year they are resuming studies.
11. POLICY ON PAYMENT OF CHARGES FOR RETAKING 
COURSES
a) That all continuing students (government and privately sponsored) 
who have courses to retake and these Courses fall beyond the set 
Normal Semester Load but below the Maximum Load for their 
Academic Programmes will be required to pay re-examination fees of 
shs. 20,000/- per Course retaken.
b) That all the students who should have graduated but failed to 
complete their studies within the period specified for their Academic 
Programmes should pay tuition fees for any Course/ Courses to be 
retaken. The calculation of tuition fees for retaking Course/Courses 
shall be based on the existing approved formula. Besides, such 
students shall also pay re-examination fee of shs. 20,000/= per Course 
retaken, Library fee of shs. 20,000/= as well as the Registration fees.
c) It has to be emphasized that this Policy only applies to those who 
should have already left the University but did not, because they have 
one or so courses to retake before they can be allowed to graduate.
d) A student who have passed the Assessment in a course but seeks to 
retake courses in order to improve his/her Pass Grade(s) if the Pass 
Grades got at the first Assessment in a Course were low, should pay 
tuition fees for any course/courses to be retaken. Please, note that by 
Policy, no student shall be allowed to retake any course, once his/her 
Board has approved the Class of Degree to be awarded to him/her.
e) In case a student has paid fees beyond the stated requirements 
indicated above, the Retake fees will either be transferred to the next 
semester or refunded.
[[page:81]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
77
CHARGING GOVERNMENT SPONSORED 
STUDENTS WHO RETAKE OR AUDIT COURSE
Effective 2005/2006 academic year, the Policy of charging students who have 
courses to Retake or Audit beyond the Normal Semester load was implemented. The 
implementation of this policy is guided by the following policy pronouncements: -
 The University Council decision at its 100th Meeting held on 15th December, 2004 
did approve a formula to charge students who retake or audit courses. Uganda 
Government decision which was contained in the circular NO. HED/174/01 by the 
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Education and Sports to the effect that with effect 
from 2005/2006 financial year, Government had ceased to provide funding the 
cost of retaking courses. That Government sponsored students who fail courses 
should now be required to meet the cost of retaking courses.
1.  RATES OF FIELD ATTACHMENT FEES
The University Council decided that beginning 2011/2012 Intake, students will 
only be required to pay Administrative and Supervision costs only. The component 
for student’s welfare requirements and Report Writing should not be paid to the 
University. The Parents/Sponsors of students will remit the funds for students’ 
welfare to students directly at the time when the Field Attachment takes place.
Based on the above University Council decision, the charges for the Field Attach-
ment will now be as follows:
(i)        Rates of Field Attachment Fees 
(a) Programmes that go once, students will be required to pay shs. 
100,000/=  (one hundred thousand shillings only) per semester 
in the First Year only;
(b) Programmes that go twice for Field Attachment, students will be 
required to  pay shs. 100,000/= per semester in the first and 
second year of study;
(c)     Programmes that go three times for Field Attachment, students will 
be required to pay shs. 100,000/= per semester in the first, second and 
third year;
(d)    Programmes that go four times for Field Attachment, students will be  
 required to pay shs. 100,000/= per semester in the first, second, third 
and fourth year. 
(ii) The Continuing Students whose programmes have more than two 
schedules of Field Attachment will also pay shs. 200,000/= per year to 
cover Administration cost in the third, fourth or fifth year, as the case may 
apply.
[[page:82]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
78
(iii) The parents and sponsors of students should ensure that students are 
availed with funds for welfare and other requirements. The recommended 
amount is shs. 400,000/= per Field Attachment.
2.      OTHER FEES  (PAYABLE TO THE UNIVERSITY)
APPLICATION FEE (PAYABLE AT THE TIME OF APPLICATION) 50,000 172,500
LATE REGISTRATION (SURCHARGE) FEE Late fees payment 
fee 5% of the remaining balance 50,000 101,000
ACCOMMODATION FEE PER SEMESTER Recess term fee 
(computed pro-rate to full ordinary semester) 300,000 600,000
ACCOMMODATION FEE FOR RECESS TERM 180,000 360,000
RE-MARK FEE PER PAPER 100,000 100,000
CERTIFICATION FEE 3,000 20,200
RE-EXAMINATION FEE FOR CONTINUING STUDENTS 20,000 40,400
AFFILIATED INSTITUTIONS FEE PER STUDENT PER YEAR 20,000 20,000
GRADUATION FEE 30,000 101,000
CONVOCATION FEE 10,000 20,200
VERIFICATION FEE 50,000 50,000
CERTIFICATE FEE 20,000 101,000
  TRANSCRIPT FEE 20,000                  101,000                                                                                                                                                  
3.     OTHER FEES (PAYABLE TO NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR 
HIGHER EDU CATION)
CONTRIBUTION TO NCHE FEES (PER YEAR) 20,000 20,000
UGANDA NATIONAL STUDENTS ASSOCIATION (PER YEAR) 2,000 2,000
4.      ALLOWANCES (PAYABLE AS SPONSORS MAY DEEM 
NECESSARY)
PERSONAL ALLOWANCE PAYABLE TO THE STUDENT 1,212,000 1,212,000
MEDICAL ALLOWANCE (PAYABLE TO THE STUDENT) 606,000 606,000
BOOKS/STATIONERY ALLOWANCE (PAYABLE TO THE STUDENT) 1,010,000 1,010,000
[[page:83]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
79
GENERAL ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS TO 
GRADUATE PROGRAMMES
RECOGNITION OF AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER LEARNING AS A UNIVERSITY (OR ITS 
EQUIVALENT)
1. A LOCAL UNIVERSITY (OR ITS EQUIVALENT)
A local University (or its Equivalent) which has been accredited and granted 
a Charter or which operates under an Act of Parliament or by Statute shall be 
recognized by Makerere University.
2. A FOREIGN UNIVERSITY (OR EQUIVALENT) SHALL BE 
RECOGNIZED BY MAKERERE UNIVERSITY IF:
Information obtained from the National Authority on Higher Education or from 
the Embassy of the country in which the Institution is located attests the fact that 
it merits recognition. Such information, however, has to be corroborated by the 
National Council for Higher Education.
(a) Graduate Diploma Programmes
A candidate must have a Bachelor’s degree or its equivalent from a chartered 
and recognised University in a subject or subjects relevant to the progragramme 
applied for. Each programme has its Admission requirements and they are 
stipulated under each of the programmes below:
(b) Master’s Degree Programme
 (i)  To be eligible for Admission to a Master’s degree programme, a candidate 
must be a holder of at least a Second Class degree or its equivalent 
awarded by Makerere University or any other recognized institution. 
(ii)  An applicant who is a holder of a third class degree or its equivalent 
may be admitted only after such Applicant has provided evidence of 
academic maturity in the desired field of study as shall be judged by the 
Board of Research and Graduate Training
 (iii)  Other specific requirements vary from programme to programme. 
(c) Doctor of Philosophy Programmes (PhD) 
1.  Applicants for PhD degree programmes at Makerere University are granted 
provisional registration of up to one academic year on the basis of acceptance 
academic qualification they would present. A graduate of Makerere University 
or any other recognized University desiring to present himself/herself as 
a candidate for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in any Faculty/School/
[[page:84]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
80
Institute, should hold such degree and be of such standing as may be 
prescribed in the regulations of the Faculty/School/ Institute concerned. 
2.  During the course of the academic year, a PhD student should develop concise 
normal research proposals with the help of some of senior members of the 
academic staff in the relevant fields of study.
 3.  The respective Boards of Faculties/Institutes /Schools should identity 
Supervisors of such students. The Senate shall, on the recommendation of 
the Academic Board, appoint one or more supervisors to advise a candidate 
whose subject of special study or research has been approved, and the 
candidate shall be required to work in close association with the supervisor or 
supervisors.
 4.  When a Research proposal of a PhD students is found satisfactory by the 
Departmental and Faculty/Institute/School of Graduate Studies and Higher 
Degree Committee the proposal should be presented to the Board of Graduate 
Studies and research for further consideration 
5.  The students whose research proposals is approved by the Board of Graduate 
Studies and Research should then be granted full registration as Doctor of 
Philosophy (PhD) degree students at Makerere University.
(d) For Medical Doctorate (M.D.) degree 
A Master’s degree in Medicine from a recognised University. 
(e)      PhD degree by Research only:
Applicants should have a Master’s degree in a field relevant to their area of further 
studies. A research outline (synopsis) of 3-5 pages’ length should accompany the 
application.    The synopsis (concept paper) contains the title of the dissertation, 
a brief background to the research, a succinct statement of the problem, the 
objectives of the research, the theoretical/ conceptual framework of the research, 
a brief review of relevant literature, a brief description of methodology and a list 
of references. Within two weeks of submitting the synopsis/concept paper, the 
student shall obtain feedback on it. This will be useful as a guide for PROVISIONAL 
ADMISSION for one year during which time the applicant will develop a 
comprehensive research proposal necessary for a full admission as soon as the 
proposal is approved.
 (f) For Doctor of Laws (LLD.) Degree 
A Master degree in Law from a recognised University. 
(g) For Doctor of Letters (D. Litt.) & Doctor of Science (D.Sc.) 
(Higher Doctorates) 
Degrees are awarded upon successful submission of original published and 
unpublished works on the area/topic of specialization. These are higher doctorates 
normally applied for by holders of Ph.D. degrees.
[[page:85]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
81
Occasional Postgraduate students 
i)  Under occasional studentship, the University accepts non-degree 
students on an agreed fees structure. Application should be channelled 
through the Heads of such institutions. 
ii)  Candidates may apply for registration at any time and could be admitted 
at the beginning of any semester of the academic year.
 iii)  Occasional students may register for at least a semester and for not more 
than one academic year. 
iv)  No such registration shall overlap two academic years.
 v)  All applications must be addressed to the Director, Directorate of 
Research and Graduate Training who shall, in consultation with relevant 
bodies within the University, register such students. 
MINIMUM DURATION OF PROGRAMMES 
Diplomas - 1 academic year 
Masters degrees (full-time)- 2 calendar years
Masters degrees (part-time)- 3 calendar years 
Master of Medicine degree(full-time)- 3 calendar years 
LLD, MD, Ph.D degree (full-time)-3 calendar years 
LLD, MD, Ph.D degree (part-time)- 5 calendar years 
With special permission, these periods may be extended as the Board of Research 
and Graduate Training may consider reasonable. 
Under no circumstances will a candidate be allowed to submit a thesis for 
examination unless he/she has been under regular and approved supervision for 
at least one year for a Master’s degree and two years for a Doctoral degree.
[[page:86]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
82
GUIDELINES FOR GRADUATE PROGRAMME 
PLANS 
1.  TYPES OF PLANS 
i)  That the Graduate Programmes at Makerere University should be based 
on the following Plans: 
Plan A: Coursework and Dissertation 
Plan B: Extended Coursework and Project Report 
Plan C: Coursework and Comprehensive Examination
Plan D: Thesis only
 ii)  That for any Graduate student to graduate in a Programme, the following 
requirements must be fulfilled: 
a)  A student’s progression under Plan A is dependent on whether he/she 
has a Research Proposal by second week of the 3rd Semester. 115 
b)  A student’s progression under Plan B is dependent on whether he/she 
has Research Proposal by second week of the 4th Semester.
c)  That the Pass Mark for all Graduate Courses shall be 60%.
d)  Credited Seminar Series conducted by students shall be mandatory. 
e)  All Coursework for Graduate Programmes shall be examined externally. 
f )  The Title of the Thesis/Dissertation/Project Report shall appear on the 
Academic Transcript with respective grades indicated. 
g)  The Dissertation is in Partial Fulfillment of the Degree (for programmes 
with Course work and dissertation). Meanwhile a Thesis is in Fulfillment 
of the Degree (For programmes of done by research alone).
2.  SPECIFIC GUIDELINES FOR PLANS
 i) PLAN A: Course Work and Dissertation 
a)  A student on this Plan must complete an approved program of 
Coursework consisting of a minimum of 18 Credit Units during the 
year. 
b)  A student must submit a Dissertation. 
c)  A Thesis shall carry credit range of 8-10 Credit Units (Units should 
determine and allocate Credit Units to Dissertation) 
d)  External examination of Dissertation shall be mandatory. 
e)  Seminar Series will be mandatory for all registered students.
[[page:87]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
83
f )  Departments will select topics for students and that a student shall be 
required to make presentations during the Seminars Series. 
g)  The minimum Graduation load shall be decided upon by the Academic 
Unit where the Programme is based.
 ii) PLAN B: Course Work and Project/Field Report 
a)  A student on Plan B must complete an approved programme of 
Coursework that shall constitute 75% of the entire work load for the 
Degree. 
b)  A student must submit a Report on a supervised Short Project/Field 
Attachment/ Industrial Training carried out.
c)  The Project/Field Report should involve a combined total of 300 hours 
(equivalent to 8 weeks of full time work) and shall carry 5 Credit Units 
(CU). The Project Report title should equally appear on the Transcript. 
d)  Seminar Series will be mandatory for all registered students and shall 
be conducted every Semester of the second year. The Seminar Series 
shall have 2 Credit Units per Semester.
e)  External examinations of Projects/Reports shall be a mandatory.
iii) PLAN C: Coursework Only and Comprehensive Examination 
a)  In this Plan, the students’ Coursework Load shall be 85% plus 
Examinations and 15% Seminar Series.
b)  Courses offered additionally by such candidates must be Advanced 
Courses.
c) Students shall be comprehensively examined and in order to be in 
normal progress, a student on this Plan must have a CGPA of not less 
than 3.0. 
d)  A candidate who has a CGPA of less than 3.0 shall be placed on 
probation.
e)  Seminar Series will be mandatory for all registered students of the 
second year. It will be credited at 2 Credit Units per Semester.
 iv) PLAN D: Thesis only (Applicable to both Masters by research and Research 
Doctorates). 
A student must demonstrate serious academic research capacity by presenting 
acceptable research concept. At the point of application/first registration, a 
student is expected to have identified a research area. This may be done in 
consultation with the Department and will be influenced by availability of 
expertise and resources in particular areas. Based on this, the student should 
develop and submit a synopsis (concept paper) of 3-5 pages to the Head of 
department. The synopsis (concept paper) contains the title of the dissertation,
[[page:88]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
84
a brief background to the research, a succinct statement of the problem, the 
objectives of the research, the theoretical/conceptual framework of the research, 
a brief review of relevant literature, a brief description of methodology and a list 
of references. Within two weeks of submitting the synopsis/concept paper, the 
student shall obtain feedback on it. Upon approval of the synopsis/concept by 
the School Higher Degrees and Research Committee, a supervisor or two shall be 
allocated to the student.
[[page:89]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
85
REVISED REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES 
FOR OPERATIONS OF THE SEMESTER/CREDIT 
UNIT SYSTEM FOR UNDERGRADUATE 
PROGRAMMES
1.       ADVANTAGES AND FEATURES OF A SEMESTER/CREDIT 
UNIT SYSTEM
i)       Allows for a wide choice of Courses to be offered and broadening areas/
fields of studies.
ii)       Enables admission to be carried out in any Semester.
iii)     Allows a student to exit and re-enter the University, as the need arises. 
iv)     Facilitates a student to progress at his/her own pace.
v)      Makes education affordable.
vi)     Permits broad and independent study.
vii)    Enables the optimum use of institutional space and other resources. 
viii)    Places less demand on the time of University teachers.
ix)      Enables expertise to be hired from other Institutions/Universities for some 
periods of  time. 
x)       Facilitating the improvement of curriculum.
xi)      Making the management of Course materials easy.
2.       THE ACADEMIC YEAR
i) In the Semester/Credit Unit System at Makerere University, the Academic 
Year shall be comprised of Two (2) Semesters and One (1) Recess Term.
ii) The Academic Programmes shall be designed per Semester/Recess Term 
per Academic Year, for example, Semester One, Semester Two and (where 
applicable) Recess Term for Year One, etc.
3.  LENGTH OF SEMESTER
(a)  The length of a normal Semester shall be Seventeen (17) weeks with 
14-15 weeks being for Teaching b) ( and 2-3 weeks for Examinations for 
both, the regular and distance learning academic programmes.
(b) The duration of a normal Recess Term shall be Ten (10) weeks.
(c)  The time period for academic programmes running as Executive/
Weekend and Block-week release or ( Modular study arrangements
[[page:90]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
86
shall take into consideration and ensure compliance with the approved 
Contact Hours and Credit Units for each taught course/ module, and the 
total Credit Units and Graduation load for that particular programme.
4.  REGISTRATION OF STUDENTS
The Registration of students is decentralized to Colleges/Schools/Institutes.
a)  The members of staff from the Office of the Academic Registrar are 
deployed to oversee the registration exercise at those Academic Units.
b)  Students shall register within the specified time for registration. 
Students shall be required to ensure that they register within the first 
three weeks from the beginning of the First Semester. Freshers/First 
year students normally register during the Orientation week.
c)  Continuing students shall indicate the Courses they would wish to 
offer/take in Semester Two while they would still be in Semester One. 
However, cach Continuing student shall confirm the Courses they 
would actually offer/take in Semester Two in the First Week of that 
Semester Two.
d)  Arrangements can also be made for registration to start before the 
beginning of the Academic year.
5.  ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES
i)  Each Academic Programme shall be defined by Courses
ii) An Academic Programme shall be composed of a set of prescribed 
Courses that shall be registered for by a student in order for him/her to 
qualify for the Award of a particular Degron Diploma/Certificate
iii)   Academic Programmes designed shall compare favorably with similar 
international ones
iv)  The structure of a particular Academic Programme shall clearly indicate 
the Core, Elective and pre-requisite Courses
6.  A COURSE
A Course is a unit of work in a particular Field/Arca of a study normally extending 
through one Semester the completion of which normally carries credit towards 
the fulfillment of the requirements of certain Degrees, Diplomas, or Certificates.
[[page:91]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
87
7.  SIZE OF A COURSE
i)  The smallest Course shall have Two (2) Credit Units
ii)  A Course that has a Practical Component within it shall have a Maximum 
of Five (5) Credit Units
iii)  A Course that has no Practical Component within it shall have a Maximum 
of Four (4) Credit Units
8. CONTACT HOUR
A Contact Hour shall be equivalent to One (1) hour of Lecture/Clinical or Two (2) 
hours of Tutorial/Practical or four (4) hours of internship/Fieldwork
9.  CREDIT UNIT
A Credit or Credit Unit is the measure used to reflect the relative weight of a given 
Course towards the fulfilment of appropriate Degree, Diploma, Certificate or other 
programmes required. One Credit Unit shall be One Contact Hour per Week per 
Semester or a series of Fifteen (15) Contact Hours:
10.  CATEGORISING COURSES
i)  Courses shall be categorized as Core, Elective, Pre-requisite or Audited
ii)  Not all the Courses in an Academic Programme shall be made Core.
iii)  The Courses for the First Year Studies shall be called Pre-requisite or 
Introductory Courses
iv)  All the Courses having the same content shall have the same Names, 
Codes and Credit Units
v)  Only the Academic Departments that have the mandate to teach 
particular Courses shall be the ones to co-ordinate/teach such Courses 
wherever they are taught/offered.
vi)  The level of content of a particular Course has to match the Credit Units 
allocated to that Course
vii)  The number of Elective Courses that cach student shall be required to 
register for in every Undergraduate Academic Programme shall always 
be stated so as to guide the students when they are choosing them from 
a particular set of Elective Courses.
viii)  There shall always be a ceiling for the number of Undergraduate students 
who shall be allowed to register for particular Elective Courses. The 
minimum number thereof shall be five (5) students).
[[page:92]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
88
ix)  The Undergraduate students should be encouraged to register for 
Audited Courses as well
x)  The Elective Courses for Postgraduate students shall be specialized or 
broad-based and shall be offered in any Semester
xi)  The Course Content of Postgraduate Academic Programmes have to 
match the higher level of study required of Postgraduate students
11.  A CORE COURSE
i)  A Core Course shall be a Course which is essential to an Academic 
Programme and gives the Academic Programme its unique features. 
Everyone offering that particular Academic Programme must pass that 
Course.
ii)  Core Courses shall be offered in all the Semesters.
12. ELECTIVE COURSE
An Elective Course shall be a Course offered in order to broaden an Academic 
Programme or to allow for specialisation. It is chosen from a given group of 
Courses largely at the convenience of the student. Another Elective Course may 
be substituted for a failed Elective Course.
13.  AUDITED COURSE
An Audited Course shall be a Course offered by a student for which a Credit/Credit 
Unit shall not be award-ed.
14.  PRE-REQUISITE
14.1 PRE-REQUISITE
A Pre-requisite is a condition (either Course or Classification), which has to be 
satisfied prior to enrolling for the Course in question. A Pre-Requisite Course, 
there-fore, shall be a Course offered in preparation for a higher level Course in the 
same area of study.
14.2 A COURSE REQUIRING A PRE-REQUISITE
i)  When a student fails a Pre-Requisite Course, he/she shall not be allowed 
to take the higher level Course requiring a Pre-requisite.
ii)  A student will be required to retake the failed Pre-Requisite Course before 
embarking on a higher-level Course requiring a Pre-requisite.
[[page:93]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
89
15.     MAJOR
A Major shall be a set of Courses in a Field/Area of specialisation in which each 
student is encouraged to explore the Field/Area in considerable depth. The set 
of Courses for a Major shall constitute not less than two-thirds of the Programme 
Load.
16.     MINOR
A Minor shall be a set of Courses in a Field/Area that is of lesser importance than 
the Major. A Minor shall constitute not more than a third of the Programme Load.
17. SPECIALISATIO IN AN ACADEMIC PROGRAMME
Some Academic Programmes allow some degree of specialization within a 
particular Programme. A Programme specialization shall be a set of Courses 
combined from both a Major and Minor areas.
18. ACADEMIC PROGRAMME LOAD
Academic Programme Load shall be the essential set of Courses registered for/
offered by a particular student for the Award of a certain Degree/Diploma/
Certificate. It has both Core and Elective Courses.
19. SEMESTER LOAD
i)     Semester Load shall be the total number of Courses for a particular 
Academic Programme offered in a Semester.
ii)      The Courses to be Retaken and those to be audited shall be within the 
Maximum Semester Load of every student.
19.1    Normal Semester Load for Undergraduate Academic Programmes
The Normal Semester Load for Undergraduate Academic Programmes shall range 
from Fifteen (15) Credit Units to Twenty-One (21) Credit Units.
19.2    Maximum Semester Load for Undergraduate Academic 
Programmes
The Maximum Semester Load for Undergraduate Academic Programmes shall 
be Twenty-eight (28) Credit Units so as to cater for students who have Courses 
to retake or those who would be able to complete the requirements for their 
respective Academic Awards in less than the stipulated minimum duration).
[[page:94]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
90
20.  SEMESTER LOAD FOR POSTGRADUATE ACADEMIC 
PROGRAMMES
The Semester Load for Postgraduate Academic Programmes shall range from Nine 
(9) Credit Units to Six- teen (16) Credit Units.
 21. MAXIMUM SEMESTER LOAD FOR GRADUATE ACADEMIC  
PROGRAMMES
The Maximum Semester Load for Postgraduate Academic Programmes shall be 
Twenty-Two (22) Credit    Units so as to cater for students who have Courses to 
retake or those who would be able to complete the requirements for their respec-
tive Academic Awards in less than the stipulated minimum duration).
22.  GRADUATION PROGRAMME LOAD
Each School Board shall specify the quantity and composition of their Programme 
Load Requirements for the Award of the Degree/Diploma/Certificate. The compo-
sition shall include both Core and Elective Courses.
23. EARNING OF CREDITS IN A COURSE
(a) Each student shall earn Credits for all the Courses specified in the 
Programme Load for Graduation
24. RETAKING A COURSE OR COURSES
(a) A student shall retake a Course or Courses when next offered, in order 
to obtain at least the Pass Mark (50%) if he/she had failed during the 
First Assessment in the Course or Courses.
(b) A student who has failed to obtain the Pass Mark (50%) during the 
Second Assessment in the same Course or Courses he/she has retaken 
shall automatically have a warning.
(c) A student may retake a Course or Courses when next offered in order 
to improve his/her Pass Grade(s) if the Pass Grade(s) got at the first 
Assessment in the Course or Courses were low. A student shall not be 
permitted to improve a mark where she/he obtained a Grade Point of 
5.0. 
(d) A student who fails to attain higher marks after retaking to improve, 
the examination results of the first sitting are recorded on the transcript 
and should not be recorded as Retake.
[[page:95]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
91
(e) Where a student misses to sit examinations for justified reasons; the 
grades obtained after sitting examination shall not be recorded as 
a retake because the candidate is sitting the examinations as a first 
attempt.
(f ) While retaking a Course or Courses, a student shall:
(i) Attend all the prescribed lectures Attend all the prescribed lectures/
tutorials/Clinicals/Practicals/Fieldwork in the Course or Courses;
(ii) Satisfy all the requirements for the Coursework Component in the Course 
or Courses; and
(iii) Sit for the University Examinations in the Course or Courses.
(g) A student shall not be allowed to accumulate more than five (5) Retake 
Courses at a time; such a student shall be required to ‘Stay Put’ to first 
retake the failed courses. 
(h) Students are required to register for retakes course(s) first before 
registering for new courses offered in that semester and the retake 
courses should fit into the approved normal load to avoid timetable 
clash.
(i) A final year student whose final Examination Results has already been 
classified by the relevant School/College Board and has qualified for 
the Award of a Degree/Diploma, shall not be permitted to retake any 
Course or Courses.
(j) When a student has retaken a course the better of the two Grades, he/
she has obtained in that Courses shall be used in the computation of 
his/her cumulative Grade Average (CGPA).
(k) Whenever a Course or Courses has/have been retaken, the Academic 
Transcript shall indicate so accordingly.
a. Students who have a course(s) to retake and these Course(s) fall beyond 
the set normal semester load for their Academic Programmes, shall 
pay tuition fees for such Course/Courses to be retaken. Besides, such 
students shall also pay the re-examination fees per Course retaken as 
well as the Registration Fees.
25.  PROGRESSION
25.1    Normal Progress
Normal Progress shall occur when a student has passed the Assessments in all the 
Courses he/she had registered for in a particular Semester and not when he/she 
has passed the Assessments in the Core Courses only.
[[page:96]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
92
25.2    Probationary Progress
A student who has failed to obtain a pass mark of 50% undergraduate and 60% 
graduate in any course, and a student who has obtained the Cumulative Grade 
Point Average (CGPA) of less than 2.0(undergraduate/3.0 graduate) shall be 
placed on Probation. Such a student shall be allowed to progress to the next 
Semester/Academic Year but shall still retake the Course(s) he/she had failed the 
Assessments in later on and obtain at least the Pass Mark (50%) in the Course(s).
25.3    Stay Put
(a) A student who has accumulated Five (5) or more courses to retake shall stay 
put – meaning that he/ she has to first do the retakes instead of continuing to 
another academic year.
(b) A student shall not stay put for more than two (2) academic years.
(c) Where there are Pre-requisite courses, students must pass the pre-requisite 
courses before proceeding to another phase.
26.  CHANGE OF COURSE
A student may be permitted to change course(s) in an Academic Programme in 
order to substitute the Course(s) failed. This permission shall only apply to elective 
courses. The Substitute Course(s) should be within the specified Course (s) for that 
Academic Programme.
27.  CHANGE OF ACADEMIC PROGRAMME  
27.1 A student may be permitted to change from one Academic 
Programme to another on condition that:
i)    He/she had satisfied the admission requirements for the Academic 
Programme applied for.
ii) He/she should not have been attending lectures/tutorials and other 
academic activities of the Academic Programme he/she would want to 
change from for more than one-half of the duration of the programme.
iii)   He/she had not been previously dismissed from the University on 
disciplinary grounds.
A student permitted to change his/her Programme may be allowed to transfer 
the Credits from the previous Academic Programme to the new Academic 
Programme, provided that the Credits being transferred are relevant to the new 
Academic Programme.
[[page:97]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
93
28.  DISCONTINUATION, OVERSTAYING ON PROGRAMME, 
DE-REGISTRATION & REINSTATEMENT
(a) A student who accumulates three (3) consecutive probations based 
on CGPA of less than 2.0 for Undergraduate, and 3.0 for Graduate 
programmes, shall be discontinued.
(b) A student who has failed to obtain the Pass Mark (50% for 
Undergraduate and 60% for Graduate) during the Third Assessment in 
the same Course or Courses he/she had retaken, shall be discontinued 
from his/her studies at the University, unless, it is the only course to be 
retaken and the student is in the final year and qualifies for a Conceded 
Pass.
(c) A student who has overstayed on an Academic Programme for more 
than 3 years after the period of time designated for the programme 
shall be liable for discontinuation/de-registration from his/her 
programme/ studies at the University. 
(d) A student who has overstayed on the programme and/or has 
been de-registered could be reinstated on case by case basis (on a 
recommendation by the School/ College Board and approval by the 
Senate/ Committee of Senate), provided the curriculum has not been 
revised and two (2) years (Four semesters) have not lapsed from the 
time they were de-registered
(e) For avoidance of doubt, when recommending a student for 
reinstatement the Schools/ Colleges shall consider the following 
conditions:
(i) That the appeal is made and recommendation submitted to the Senate 
Committee, within two (2) years (Four semesters) from the time one was 
de-registered or from when his/ her allowable study duration lapsed. 
(ii) That there is evidence of extenuating circumstances and reasons, such 
as chronic/ long illness, health complications or transfer from work/ duty 
station, etc. that constrained one from completion in time; 
(iii) That the remaining workload can be completed strictly within one 
academic year (two semesters);
(iv) That the programme being pursued is still being offered by the University;
(v) That the programme curriculum has not changed.
[[page:98]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
94
The table below should be strictly followed to guide withdrawal /extension/
discontinuation of students for overstay on programs in the 
University. 
Program Type Normal 
Study Dura-
tion (Years)
Withdrawal/ 
Extension 
(Years)
Window 
period for 
Clear-
ance/ 
Comple-
tion** 
(Years)
Maximum/Al-
lowable Study 
Duration, 
then de-reg-
istration/
Discontinua-
tion*(Years)
Allowable 
time  if Ap-
peal for Rein-
statement 
Succeeds 
(years)
PhD/Doctoral 
programme
3-5 2 0 7 1
Two year MA/
MSC.
2 2 1 5 1
Three Year 
MA/MSC.
3 2 1 6 1
Three Year 
BA/ BSc.
3 2 1 6 1
Four Year BA/ 
BSc.
4 2 1 7 1
Five Year BSc. 
/BA
5 2 1 8 1
PG Diploma 1 2 0 3 1
NOTE:
1. *A student shall be automatically deregistered/ discontinued on expiry of the 
maximum study duration and allowable period on the program;
2. **A window period (before discontinuation/de-registration for overstay on a 
program) is provided, mainly to allow students clear pending issues such as: fees 
payment, missing/ incomplete marks, appeals for remarking/ grading, review 
and submission of research projects), after which automatic discontinuation for 
overstay occurs;
3. A de-registered/discontinued student may appeal for reinstatement, provided he/ 
she meets the conditions as stipulated in the Policy Guidelines on Reinstatement;
4. On successful appeal for reinstatement one must complete all the study 
requirements within a period not exceeding one academic year.
[[page:99]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
95
29. ABSCONDMENT
A student is considered to have absconded from studies if she/he does not register 
or attend lectures for two (2) cumulative academic years.
A student who:
Absconds from his/her studies for two (2) cumulative academic years /Four 
semesters shall be discontinued from his/her studies.
30 .  WITHDRAWAL
(a) A student can apply to his/her respective Board of Studies for 
permission to withdraw from studies at any time of the semester. 
Reasons for withdrawal should be given in the letter of application.
(b) Permission to withdraw shall be granted by the School Board only on 
compassionate grounds or in cases of illness or financial constraints 
or serious social or domestic difficulties or exceptional professional 
commitment which can be demonstrated to have adversely affected 
the candidate.
(c) A student shall be allowed only a maximum of two (2) withdrawals 
on an Academic Programme, and each withdrawal shall not exceed a 
period of one academic year (two Semesters).
(d) The period of withdrawal(s) shall not count against the period of 
candidature for the programme a student is registered for.
(e) Subject to the University’s Fees Policy, when a student is granted 
withdrawal, he/she does not pay tuition fees for the year he/she is away 
however, all functional fees remain non-refundable.  These include, but 
not limited to:
(i) Fees for Residence, 
(ii) Application, 
(iii) School Requirements,
(iv) Registration, 
(v) Examinations, 
(vi)  Identity Cards and
(vii)  The Guild charges.
(f ) If a student seeking withdrawal from studies did not pay functional 
fees, he/she must pay all functional fees before the withdrawal is 
granted.
[[page:100]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
96
(g) If a student has paid tuition fees, and has been permitted to withdraw 
from studies his/her tuition should be refunded according to the 
following schedules:
(i) By the End of the First Week of a Semester 100%
(ii) By the End of the Second Week of a Semester 80%
(iii) By the End of the Third Week of a Semester 60/%
(iv) By the End of the Fourth Week of a Semester 40%
(v) By the End of the Fifth Week of a Semester 20%
(vi) After the Fifth Week of a Semester 0%
(h) In case an Academic Programme to which a student has been admitted 
is not conducted in a particular academic year, the University will 
refund the full tuition fees paid by the student. 
(i) A student who had withdrawn from studies shall apply to his/her 
respective School Board to resume studies and shall indicate that the 
circumstances that made him/her withdraw can no longer affect his/
her studies.
(j) Students should take note that the above regulations do not cover 
the period of sponsorship. The period of sponsorship is governed 
by the regulations and policy of the sponsor. In the case of Uganda 
Government sponsorship, the period is that stipulated in a given 
Academic Programme.
[[page:101]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
97
REVISED GENERAL ACADEMIC AND 
EXAMINATIONS REGULATIONS
University examinations are conducted by the Academic Units on behalf of the 
Academic Registrar during specified periods. These rules set out the procedures 
for such examinations and include procedural obligations of students sitting such 
an examination and staff who are involved in the management of the process.
1. COURSEWORK ASSESSMENTS
i.  Coursework Assessments have to be planned in advance and students 
have to be informed formally about them at the beginning of each 
Semester. Such information shall be contained in the Almanac of each 
Academic Unit.
ii.  The script/results for the last set of Coursework Assignments in a 
Semester shall be availed to the respective students and displayed Two 
(2) Weeks before the commencement of the End of-Semester University 
Examinations, at the latest.
iii.  The plans for the Coursework Assessments shall be indicated clearly 
i.e. the modes of the Assessments; when each Assessment would be 
conducted; its duration as well as the maximum marks to be awarded in 
the Assessment.
iv.  The Coursework (Progressive/Continuous Assessments) shall contribute 
between 30% - 50% of the total marks in each Course.
v.  The Coursework (Progressive/Continuous Assessment) component shall 
consist of at least One (1) Test and One (1) Homework or Two (2) Tests per 
course.
vi.  The tools for Coursework Assessments may include the following: -
a.  Multiple-choice Tests (each lasting for ten (10) to twenty (20) 
minutes.
b.  Short Answer – Types Tests (each lasting for thirty (30) minutes.
c.  Oral Examinations (where applicable only)
d.  Long Answer Essay – Type Tests done within the lecture room/hall 
for a duration of (forty) 40 to (fifty) 50 minutes. 
e.  Take-away Essay – type Questions
 (Which would involve the use of library facilities and some 
investigation work and completed within periods ranging from 
three (3) to fourteen (14) days).
[[page:102]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
98
f.  Project Work involving fieldwork, laboratory work/practicals 
(conducted for two (2) months).
g.  Group work- Each participant in the group must have a defined role 
given by the instructor.
vii.  All the Assignments, duly marked shall be returned to students in 
reasonable time and not later than two weeks before the commencement 
of University examinations.
viii.  Heads of Department shall monitor the levels of compliance with the 
requirements of the Coursework Assessments for the various academic 
programmes.
vii. Time-tabling for examination shall be centralized in the Academic 
Registrar’s office.
viii.  A data-base for teaching/examination space in relation to capacity be 
established.
ix.  Every student shall be required to sign a register as he/she hands in a 
Coursework Assignment to the respective Lecturer/Professor so as to 
keep a record of all those who have done and handed in coursework.
x.  A student who fails to honour the deadline set for handing in an 
assignment (written assignment, case studies, projects, clinical, case 
reports, internship report, field attachment reports) without justifiable 
causes(s) shall receive a score of a zero or fail grade in that assignment.
xi.  A student who does not have course work (written assignment, 
case studies, projects, clinical, case reports, internship report, field 
attachment reports) shall be denied Certificate of Due Performance and 
will not be allowed to sit the University examinations (Attendance lists, 
course work assessments done will be used as evidence). Certificate of 
due performance would be given to a student who obtained 70% of 
attendance. 
2. COU RSE ASSESSMENT AND GRADING
Each course under the Program for undergraduate programmes is assessed in two 
parts: 
i. Coursework (Progressive/Continuous Assessment) shall contribute 30- 
50% of the total marks. 
ii.  The University Examinations shall contribute a maximum of 50- 70% of 
the total marks. 
3. END-OF SEMESTER ASSESSMENTS
i.  The End-of-Semester Assessments should be preceded with proper 
study of both the syllabus and the associated study objectives.
[[page:103]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
99
ii.  That syllabus contents and learning objectives should be synchronized in 
order to ensure that the examination questions set in a particular Course 
were balanced.
iii.  Examiners are required to maintain confidentiality of examination 
papers at all stages until the paper has been done by the candidates. The 
contents of examination must not be disclosed to any person other than 
those colleagues or officials of the University specially appointed to deal 
with the papers.
iv.  That in order to ease the setting of both progressive and end of semester 
assessments, each Internal Examiner shall develop an assessment 
questions’ bank.
v.  A combination of measurement tools shall be used when setting 
examination questions for a particular Course. For example, examination 
questions for a Course may be set comprising the following elements: -
a.  Twenty Multiple-Choice items (equivalent to one essay question) to 
measure knowledge drawn from all the areas of the syllabus.
b.  Five compulsory Short Answer questions (equivalent to one essay 
question) to measure understanding.
c.  Four Essay-Type questions (of which at least two have to be 
answered) to measure analytical and higher – order intellectual 
abilities and problem-solving approach.:
d.  Open book assignment regulated in terms of time and the sources, 
time & nature of presentation.
e.  Approved alternative online assessment tools/modalities
Table I: Online Assessment type with Examples
Assessment Type Examples
Traditional assessment 
submitted online
Essays, Case studies, Article reviews, Proposal writing, 
Report writing
Automated Online 
Assessment 
Online Quizzes (Multiple choices questions, Multiple 
response questions, fill in the blanks, true and false, 
Matching, Ordering)
Online interactions Contributions to forums, chats, blogs and wikis, reading 
summaries, collaborative learning, critical reviews
Group assessment online Online presentations, group online projects, online debate
Critical reflection and 
meta-cognition 
Electronic portfolios, online journals, logs, diaries, blogs, 
wikis, embedded reflective activities, peer and self-
assessment
Authentic assessment Scenario based learning, laboratory/field trip reports, 
simulations, case studies/role plays, online oral 
presentations
[[page:104]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
100
Table 2: Online assessment types and how they are used
Assessment 
Type
Setting up When to use What can it 
assess
Considerations 
(workload, timing, 
inclusiveness, etc)
Take-home 
papers and 
open-book 
exams
Require 
appropriately 
designed 
questions 
that do not 
over-rely on 
memory and 
recall, but 
instead on 
interpretation 
and analysis 
Questions 
are set 
using verbs 
from the 
application, 
analysis, 
evaluation 
and creation 
levels of 
blooms 
taxonomy
These are 
accessed 
online, 
completed, 
and then 
submitted 
by a specific 
deadline in 
the Learning 
Management 
System (LMS) 
or using 
e-mail
Skills in 
organizing large 
quantities of 
information, 
synthesize 
information 
rather than just 
recall it, and 
the ability to 
identify key data 
and information 
quickly and 
accurately
• State the duration 
students are 
expected to do the 
exam or write a 
paper
• Guidance on 
the referencing 
standards required.
• Provide a word 
limit.
• Appropriate 
question-setting and 
student preparation.
• Students should 
have access to 
materials during the 
exam.
• Use of Turn-it-in.
• Provide a rubric.
Multiple 
choice 
questions
Requires time 
to build the 
questions 
depending 
on the 
complexity of 
the questions. 
Marking is 
automated.
Questions 
that require 
facts, e.g., 
parts of a 
machine, 
parts of a 
human body, 
etc.
Efficient for 
rapid testing 
of factual 
material, 
suitable 
for large 
groups and 
gives instant 
feedback to 
students
Tests student 
knowledge recall 
and can also 
test higher-
level thinking 
especially where 
answers are 
similar but only 
one is correct.  
Also tests quick 
thinking and 
decision making 
in aptitude tests
Technical support 
for staff to set up 
Moodle quizzes.
• Time required for 
moderation.
• Provide a shorter 
time window for 
completion.
• Can connect with 
Moodle grade book
[[page:105]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
101
Portfolio Students 
collect 
evidence of 
achievement 
of the course 
learning 
outcomes 
in hard or, 
electronic 
format.  
Evidence can 
be in videos, 
photos, 
graphics, 
audio, text
Used in 
practical/
applied 
disciplines 
where 
evidence 
is provided 
in hard or 
electronic 
format. 
Students 
can also use 
a portfolio 
as a modern 
CV.  Visualizes 
evidence of 
knowledge, 
skills, 
competencies 
learned
Digital and 
academic skills; 
knowledge; 
personal growth; 
development of 
ideas
• Guidance on 
maximum timing 
for video/audio 
material.
• Specify portfolio 
content.
•  Design and matrix 
demonstrating how 
evidence aligns with 
learning outcomes.
Support students to 
appreciate critical 
reflection.
Reflective 
journals 
Students 
write about 
what they 
have learned, 
drawing 
upon their 
experiences 
or practice, 
and relating 
it to their 
reading
Used to 
produce an 
analytical 
piece of work 
describing an 
event or idea, 
using a range 
of differing 
perspectives 
thereby 
reducing on 
plagiarism
Development of 
reflective, and 
critical thinking, 
and documenting 
a learning 
journey.  Students 
can demonstrate 
creativity and 
originality
• Guided discussion 
of illustrative 
examples are useful.
• Suggest indicative 
word limits on each 
section.
• Develop a rubric 
to assess, content 
reflection, personal 
growth and 
advancement
[[page:106]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
102
Group/
collaborative 
assignments 
Students are 
grouped and 
each group 
is allocated a 
case study or 
topic
It works well 
for authentic 
cases or topics 
linked to the 
students’ 
circumstances 
or 
programme
Critical thinking 
and other soft 
skills 
• Requires online 
platform.
• Inclusivity of group 
members. 
• Encourage groups 
to design a plan for 
their interactions.
• Encourage 
students to engage 
in deep critical 
thinking of the case 
or topic
Wiki A website 
developed 
collaboratively 
by students 
allowing any 
user to add or 
edit content 
Students 
use the 
essay-writing 
services to 
do this type 
of work for 
them, and 
thus it is 
harder to 
plagiarize
Improved 
technical 
competence and 
students can 
demonstrate 
where they 
have worked 
collaboratively
• Platform to host 
the wiki.
• State the duration 
student are 
expected to use the 
wiki.
• A digital footprint is 
kept to evaluate how 
and when students 
are accessing 
information
Individual 
peer 
assessment 
of 
contribution 
to group 
work
Students 
grouped and 
each student 
is required 
to review 
another 
person’s work 
Used to 
assess the 
level of 
contribution 
of each 
student to 
the group 
work, 
assessed by 
their peers.
Used to track 
individual 
student 
development
General 
engagement 
with the task, 
ability to work in 
teams, leadership, 
communication.
Students learn 
how to provide 
constructive 
feedback to their 
peers
• Assessment 
method should 
be explained to 
students at the start 
of the group work 
activity.
• Students do 
not need long to 
complete peer 
feedback.
• Encourages 
students to 
participate in the 
group work
[[page:107]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
103
Video/audio 
recordings, 
podcasts 
Students 
gather 
information 
on a subject 
and present 
it in audio or 
visual form 
within a 
specific time 
duration 
Used to 
promote 
a more 
inclusive 
approach to 
assessment 
and these 
are relatively 
difficult to 
plagiarize 
Students ability 
to portray 
complex ideas in 
an accessible way
• Provide technical 
support in compiling 
the video/audio.
• Indicate expected 
recording duration.
• Assessment 
based on students’ 
knowledge rather 
than technical 
specifications.
• Suitable for 
group or individual 
assignment.
Blog Students 
will need to 
register for a 
blog
Used for 
ideas or 
concepts 
that are 
developed 
over an 
extended 
period of 
time.  Useful 
for reflective 
learning
Application 
of theoretical 
connections with 
the real world, 
transferable skills 
and digital skills 
• Guide students on 
when, what and how 
much to post.
• Ensure the blogs 
have academic 
validity.
• Training students 
to use the platform.
• Monitor students’ 
progress.
Claim Students are 
required to 
claim the 
extent of 
achievement 
of different 
learning 
outcomes 
and give 
evidence of 
their claim
Used in 
practical 
subjects, for 
example if 
a student 
claims 
mastery 
of writing 
an App, 
they show 
evidence of 
writing the 
same, etc.
Application, 
analysis, 
evaluation and 
creation skills and 
competencies 
• Guide students 
on the learning 
outcomes from 
which claims should 
be written and 
evidenced.
• Provide a grading 
rubric.
 
The integrity of online university examinations shall be maintained at all times and 
the examination regulations against examination irregularities and malpractices 
shall apply.
i. Time allocated shall be from 1 ½ hours up to 4 hours.
ii. That time-tabling for examination shall be centralized in the Academic 
Registrar’s office.
[[page:108]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
104
iii. That a data-base for teaching/examination space in relation to capacity 
be established.
vi.  The time allocated for a particular examination shall be proportional to 
the weight of a Course.
4.  MODERATION OF EXAMINATION 
There shall be moderation of examination. Such moderation shall be by either 
external or internal moderation. The Heads of Department shall be responsible for 
moderation of examinations. 
External examiners may moderate the question papers when requested to do so.
5.   INVIGILATION
1. Each Dean, Head of Department and Course Instructors shall ensure that the 
invigilation and supervision of any examination is effectively and professionally 
done. It is a duty of every academic staff to participate in invigilation of 
University examinations. It is a duty of the Dean/ HOD to set up a roster for 
invigilators.
2. Every candidate shall sign an attendance sheet as he/she hands in his/her 
script for every test/examination he/she has sat for.
3.  Examination results shall be submitted in both electronic and signed hard 
copies in all the Departments.
4.  Invigilators shall ensure that examination scripts for all the candidates who 
have sat the examinations in the room(s) where they have been invigilating 
are collected after each candidate has signed to hand in his/her examination 
script.
5. Each examination paper shall be under the specific direction of senior 
members of the academic staff nominated by the Head of Department/Dean.
6.  Invigilators shall obtain from their department offices lists showing the names 
of candidates sitting the particular examination.
7.  After collecting the Examination papers from the Examination Officer, 
Invigilators shall be present in the examination room at least thirty minutes 
before the commencement of an examination.
8.  Invigilators must ensure that ONE answer book is provided for each candidate 
unless the rubric on the question paper requires otherwise. This answer book 
must be filled before any additional answer book is provided.
9.  Invigilators shall admit Candidates to the examination room ten (10) minutes 
before the commencement of the examination. The Invigilators shall ensure 
that that the Candidates take places/seats assigned to them. Handbags, 
books and other similar articles are not allowed in examination rooms. Senior 
invigilator shall:
a.  Make an announcement to the effect that candidates should satisfy 
themselves that they are in possession of the correct paper.
[[page:109]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
105
b.  Call attention to any rubric at the head of the paper which seems to 
require attention.
c.  Announce that, where this is practicable, both sides of the paper must 
be used.
10.  The Invigilator shall then tell candidates when they may begin writing the 
examination.
11.  In the case of a candidate whose name is not included in the list but who 
presents himself for the examination, the invigilator should:
a.  Ask a candidate to state the precise title of the question paper he/she 
is to take.
b.  Ask a candidate if he/she has ensured that he/she would not be in 
another examination room. If the candidate is right, he/she should be 
admitted to a spare place and allowed to begin the paper.
c.  Shall report the name of the candidate and particulars to the 
examination officer through the invigilators report form.
12.  Invigilators shall not admit candidates to the examination room after half an 
hour from the commencement of the examination and should not permit 
them to leave the room until thirty minutes have expired. Late candidates shall 
not be allowed extra time.
13.  No candidate may be admitted after the expiry of half an hour from the 
beginning of the examination period. A candidate may nevertheless be 
admitted at any time on the following conditions:
a.  the invigilator shall make it clear to the candidate that the University 
reserves the right to refuse acceptance of his script.
b.  The invigilator shall make a full report in writing to the Registrar 
stating:
i. the time of admission
ii. whether any candidate had previously left the room.
iii. Any special reason given by the candidate for the lateness.
14.  Invigilators shall on no account give any information to a candidate who asks 
questions about contents of a question paper or doubts its accuracy. Any 
question of this nature should be referred immediately to the examiner in the 
subject to clarify the point to all candidates.
15.  At the commencement of the examination invigilators shall check the names 
of the candidates against the copy of the list to ascertain who is present and 
who is absent, and to confirm that every candidate is where he/she should be 
(so that no candidate attempts the wrong paper).
16.  At the end of the first half-hour the word “ABSENT” shall be written on the list 
against the appropriate names and the total numbers present and absent 
shall be entered in the space at the foot of the list.
17.  Invigilators shall then collect the blank answer books from all vacant places.
[[page:110]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
106
Spare question-papers should be returned to the Examination Officer.
18.  During the examination, invigilators shall ensure that candidates are provided 
with any additional requirements (e.g., supplementary sheets, log tables 
etc.). Candidates may be permitted to do rough work on the left-hand pages 
of the scripts on the understanding that this is crossed out at the end of the 
examination. 
19.  No candidates shall be permitted to leave his/her place during the examination 
except to leave the examination room.
20.  A candidate who contravenes the regulation and instructions governing 
the examination, especially by unfair practices such as copying from or 
communicating with other candidates, shall be reported immediately to the 
Dean’s office for further action by Examinations Irregularities committee of 
the faculty which should meet immediately after the end of the examination 
session to take appropriate action.
21.  The candidate shall be informed that he/she has contravened the regulations 
and that he has been reported, but shall not be prevented from continuing his 
paper. A written report must be sent to the Academic registrar including full 
details of the contravention.
22.  Invigilators shall not permit candidates to leave their places before their 
scripts have been collected. Candidates who wish to leave the examination 
room before the end of the examination shall hand their scripts to the 
invigilator before leaving the examination room. No candidate shall leave the 
examination room during the last ten minutes of the time allocated for the 
examination except in case of emergency.
23.  At the end of the examination period invigilators shall instruct the candidates 
to stop writing and shall then collect all the scripts in the order of the lists.
24.  When all the scripts have been collected, the candidates may leave the 
examination room.
25.  Wherever separate answer books have been used for different parts of the 
paper, they must be collected in separate piles and candidates should be 
warned at the outset not to tie separate sections together.
26.  Invigilators shall hand scripts (arranged in the order of the lists) to the Chief 
internal examiner who shall sign for them on the invigilators form. Invigilators 
shall be responsible in all cases of loss, damage etc. for their scripts until they 
are checked and accepted as correct by the internal examiner.
27.  The invigilator must ensure that no answer books have remained uncollected 
and no spare question paper or spoilt answer book is left on the desk.
28.  The attention of the invigilators is drawn to the fact that smoking is not 
allowed in the examination room and that this applies to invigilators as well as 
candidates.
29.  Internal Examiners (or their nominees) are required to attend in the 
examination rooms at the commencement of each period to assist the 
invigilators. Instructions which the examiners (or their deputies) may wish to 
be given should be announced by the invigilators.
[[page:111]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
107
30.  Cases of illness should be reported to the Dean/ Academic Registrar as soon as 
possible.
31.  Invigilators shall have the power to confiscate any unauthorized book, 
manuscript, or other aid brought into the examination room. Such materials 
shall be stored and presented as evidence of examination irregularity.
6.  ABSENCE FROM EXAMINATION
i. If the Board of a School is satisfied that a student has no justifiable 
reason for having been absent from a particular examination, such a 
student shall receive a fail (F) Grade for the Course(s) he/she had not sat 
the examination in. The Course(s) in which the Fail (F) Grade was/were 
awarded shall also count in the calculation of the CGPA.
ii. If the Board of a School is satisfied that a student was absent from 
coursework assessment and or a final examination due to justifiable 
reason(s) such as sickness or loss of a parent/guardian, then a Course 
Grade of ABS shall be assigned to that Course(s).
7.  DEFERRED EXAMINATION
i. A student who provides credible reason for failure to complete 
coursework assessment or to attend an examination based on 6 (ii) 
above (Absence from examination) may be permitted to ‘sit’ the deferred 
examination or coursework assignment. The deferred examination 
or course work shall be administered as soon as possible during the 
semester if the concerned department or/ course work Lecturer can 
make the appropriate arrangements. OR the deferred examination or 
coursework shall be administered at the next examination session.
ii. Students needing a deferred exam must submit application to their 
respective Dean’s or Di- rector’s Office. The application and supporting 
documentation pertaining to the absence must be presented as soon 
as the student is able, having regard to the circumstances underlying 
the absence but not later than the beginning of the semester in which 
the examination is scheduled. Where the cause is incapacitating 
illness, a student must present a University Hospital Medical Statement 
Form. In other cases, including severe domestic affliction, adequate 
documentation must be provided to substantiate the reason for an 
absence.
iii. In case the application for deferred examination has been approved, the 
Department responsible for the course shall make arrangements for the 
approved deferred exam.
iv. The grades obtained from a deferred examination shall not be categorized 
as retake because The assessment(s) is for the first time.
[[page:112]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
108
v.       A deferred exam shall not be approved if a student has not been in regular 
attendance where Attendance and/or participation are required, and/or, 
excluding the final exam has completed Less than half of the assigned 
work.
vi. A Student with two or more deferred exams outstanding from a previous 
semester may be required to reduce the number of courses in which 
they are registered in order to accommodate deferred courses from 
previous semester(s) in their semester load. Deferred examination shall 
be included in a Student’s maximum semester load.
vii. A Student shall be required to pay for deferred examination and payment 
of shall normally be made at the beginning of the semester.
8.0  ILLNESS DURING EXAMINATIONS
If one feels ill during an examination, he/she should inform an invigilator. Such a 
candidate should not be allowed to continue doing the examination, but should 
immediately be sent to University Hospital for handling and be required to present 
a medical report after wards.
9.0  TIMETABLES FOR UNIVERSITY
Timetables for University examinations are posted on Student Notice Boards and 
On-line Services. Misreading or misinterpretation of the timetable will not be 
accepted as an excuse or justifiable cause for failing to attend an examination. 
Students are advised to copy and keep a hard copy of the timetable to avoid such 
errors.
10.0  ELECTRONIC CALCULATORS
i.  The use of authorised, silent, cordless nonprogrammable calculators are 
allowed in exams only if the question paper permits it. Such calculators 
may contain simple memory functions for use in the course of calculation. 
ii.  Candidates shall seek the approval for use of their calculator prior to 
examinations by the Invigilator, who will identify approved calculators 
with a tamper evident label.
iii.  It is the responsibility of the candidate to bring the calculator to the 
exam room and to ensure that a spare battery is available. In all cases 
calculators must be silent.
iv.  The use of any OTHER calculator or electronic device capable of carrying 
out the retrieval of stored numerical or textual information is strictly 
forbidden. This restriction does not apply to “Open Book” exams. Failure 
to comply with these regulations may result in confiscation of your
[[page:113]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
109
non- approved Calculator, or, in extreme cases, facing the university 
examination irregularities committee.
11.0  ACCOMMODATION OF RELIGIOUS CREED
i.  Makerere University is a secular institution. It is the official policy of 
the University that unless otherwise provided, all days in the week are 
working days. Staff and students are expected to conduct or attend 
lectures and examinations at scheduled time and day.
ii.  Requests to accommodate a student’s religious creed by scheduling tests 
or examinations at alternative times may not be entertained.
iii.  Students who miss exams or test based on religious creed should 
inform their respective Deans /Directors as soon as the timetable is 
published preferably two weeks before examination so as to avoid being 
categorized as being absent without justifiable cause. 
12.0  AL TERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS – STUDENTS WITH 
DISABILITY
i.  Students living with disability may require alternative examination 
arrangements which accommodate their disability. Such arrangement 
may include the provision of a scribe or reader supervision, extended 
time, access to medication, or the use of assisted technology.
ii.  Students who require alternative examination arrangements shall register 
with their respective Deans’ offices a week before the examination. 
The Deans will in turn assess their needs and liaise with the Academic 
Registrar’s Office.  
iii.  The invigilators have the discretion to grant disabled Students more 
time but the time granted should not exceed 30 minutes from the end of 
examination session.
13.0  ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
The University regards academic misconduct as a very serious matter. Misconduct 
in examinations includes But shall not be limited to the following actions:
1.  Cheating is defined as any illegitimate behavior designed to deceive those 
setting, administering and marking the assessment. Cheating in a University 
assessment is a very serious academic offence, which may lead ultimately to 
expulsion from the University. Cheating can take one of a number of forms, 
including:
i.  Taking into the exam venue, or possessing whilst in that room, any books, 
notes or other material which have not been authorised;
[[page:114]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
110
ii.  Writing notes on parts of the body or having notes on clothings
iii.  Having notes written in your identity documents or authorized
 examination materials e.g. logarithm table.
iv.  Accessing information stored or written on electronic equipment.
v.  Obtaining an examination paper ahead of its authorised release
vi.  Copying from another student in an examination.
vii.  Aiding or attempting to aid another candidate, or obtaining or attempting 
to obtain aid from another candidate; 
viii.  Passing yourself off as another person or impersonation 
ix.  Such behavior as may in the view of the Invigilator prejudice the 
performance of other candidates.
2.  Collusion, i.e. the representation of another’s work or ideas as one’s own 
without appropriate  acknowledgement or referencing, where the owner of 
the work knows of the situation and both work towards the deceit of a before, 
during or after an examination or other assessment so as to either obtain or 
offer to others an unfair advantage in that examination or assessment;
3  Plagiarism, i.e. the act of representing another’s work or ideas as one’s own 
without appropriate acknowledgement or referencing. There are three 
main types of plagiarism’ which could occur within all modes of assessment 
(including examinations):
i.  Direct copying of text from a book, article, fellow student’s essay, handout, 
thesis, web page or other source without proper acknowledgement.
ii.  Claiming individual ideas derived from a book, article etc. as one’s own, 
and incorporating them into one’s work without acknowledging the 
source of these ideas.
iii.  Overly depending on the work of one or more others without proper 
acknowledgement of the source, by constructing an essay, project etc. 
by extracting large sections of the text from another source, and merely 
linking these together with a few of one’s own sentences. (Schools/ 
Colleges may extend these definitions for specific subject areas and 
provide students with examples as appropriate). The correct referencing 
system for making quotations explicit and acknowledging sources shall 
be available through personal tutors or supervisors, specific tutorial 
sessions and handbooks.) 
Contravention of the above Regulations will be treated under the Procedures for 
Handling Cases of Suspected Cheating in University Assessment which can be 
found on the University examination malpractices Irregularities rules. Details of 
the penalties are in another section of this book.
[[page:115]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
111
14.0  IDENTIFICATION DURING EXAMINATION
i.  Students must produce their student identification card and or 
examination permit. Where the identification provided is not clear, 
additional forms of identity verification may be requested.
ii.  A student wearing clothing that obscures their face may be asked to 
remove that clothing for identification purposes in private and before an 
examination supervisor of the same gender. 
iii.  A student, who fails to comply with a request above, may be refused 
admission to the examination room.
15.0  MARKING SCHEME /GUIDE
a) Each question paper set has to be accompanied by a clear marking 
guide.
b) All the examination papers shall be moderated by Departmental 
Examinations Committees and External Examiners.
c)     for greater accuracy and easier accountability, examination scripts shall 
be marked by more than one Examiner
16.0  MARKING OF EXAMINATION
a) Marking examinations shall be done by Internal Examiners/Course 
instructors/Lecturers
b)   Every examination for a Degree or Diploma of the University whether 
taken at one time or in sections, shall be conducted by Internal 
examiners, one or where possible, two or more in each course / subject 
and external examiners, one or more in each Course/subject. The Head 
of Department/Dean shall be the Chief Internal Examiner.
c)      Only persons at the level of Lecturer should be internal examiners
d) /Graduate Fellows/Postgraduate students should serve as Tutorial 
Assistants and Examiners under the supervision of the respective 
Course Lecturers/Professors, for some remuneration
e)      where the staff in an Academic Unit is sufficient to form a team of 
Examiners, they should be utilized.
f ) Computer-based marking of examination questions should be 
introduced.
g)  Examination Marking Centers should be created to ensure that 
marking is completed on schedule and that scripts are not lost or 
misplaced.
[[page:116]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
112
h)  Any Lecturer/Professor who has delayed to complete marking, 
compiling and/or submitting the marks of the candidates for whom 
he/she received the scripts for marking shall be reported/referred to 
the Appointments Board and or subjected to appropriate disciplinary 
action.
i) That any Lecturer/Professor who loses/misplaces the examination 
script(s) of any candidate(s) which were handed over to him/her shall 
have his/her case reported/referred to the Appointments Board and 
or subjected to appropriate disciplinary action. The Department shall 
endevour to resolve the situation at the cost of the Department/
University.
17.0  COMPILATION OF MARKS AND ANALYSIS
a) It is the duty of the Internal Examiners to ensure that all the candidates 
who sit for a particular examination have their scripts marked. The 
examination numbers of the absentees must be properly recorded and 
the scaling of marks or standardizing them (where necessary) shall be 
done.
b) The Office of the Academic Registrar shall circulate the lists of all 
registered students for every Course to all the relevant Deans and 
Heads of Department.
c)     The Lecturers/Professors should be availed the records of registered 
students for the Courses they teach to guide in compilation of marks.
d) The marking of examination scripts shall be completed within a 
set period of time and once the marking exercise is completed, 
the compilation of marks for each Course should be immediately 
embarked on.
e) The compilation of the marks for all the courses within a particular 
Department shall be completed within one week. No member of the 
support staff should be permitted to handle the compilation of marks.
f ) All the matters pertaining to incomplete/missing marks should be 
investigated as soon as possible and adequate explanations about 
such cases provided before the examination results are submitted to 
the relevant School. Examinations Committees for further analysis.
g)    The marks which are compiled by Departments shall be submitted to 
the Offices of the respective Deans according to the set deadlines.
h) The School Board of Studies which comprise the Dean, Heads of 
Department, all Programme Coordinators and members of Academic 
staff representing Departments, shall analyse the examination results 
in accordance with the approved regulations/guidelines for the 
Semester system within one (1) week.
[[page:117]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
113
i) The Board of Examiners, through the Board of Studies, should take 
decisions on the accuracy of the compilation and analysis of the 
examination results.
j)       The College Academic Board shall process and approve all examinations 
results in the College.
k)   All examination results shall be compiled and submitted using the 
format approved by the University Senate.
18.0  CALCULATION OF THE CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT 
AVERAGE (CGPA)
The Cumulative Grade Point Average at a given time shall be obtained by:
(a) Multiplying the grade point obtained in each Course by the Credit 
Units  assigned to the Course to arrive at the Weighted Score for the 
Course.
(b)   Adding together the Weighted Scores for all the Courses taken up to 
that time.
(c)    Dividing the Total Weighted Score by the total number of Credit Units 
taken up to that time.
18.1 Graduation Programme Load
Each School Board of Studies shall specify the quantity and composition of their 
programme load requirements for the award of the degree/diploma/certificate. 
The composition shall include both core and elective courses.
19.0  APPROVAL OF EXAMINATION RESUL TS
a) The Senate has delegated the power to approve all examination results 
to College Academic Boards/ Stand alone Schools. But the results 
shall not be regarded as final until they are confirmed by Senate on 
submission of Appropriate Pass Lists to Senate by the relevant College 
Academic Boards/Stand alone Schools. The Appropriate Pass Lists to 
Senate shall be accompanied with College Academic Board Minutes.
b)   Students shall be provided with examination results using the 
approved testimonial format.
20.0  ENTERING MARKS ON THE RESUL TS MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM
a) It shall be the duty of the Lecturer/Course instructor to enter marks of 
the course he/she has taught and examined in the Results Management 
system.
[[page:118]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
114
b)  The students will not view the results on the system until the 
Department has discussed and approved them.
c)  After approval of results by the Departmental Examination Committee, 
the Lecturer/Course instructor will remain with viewing rights only.
21.0  ROLE OF HEADS OF DEPARTMENT
a)  The Heads of Department are responsible for:
i)      Ensuring completion of marking and internal moderation by the date set 
in the assessment calendar.
ii)     Ensuring that after the Department has discussed results, any 
adjustments made/agreed on during the meeting are effected on the 
results management system.
b)  Beyond the Department, the Head of Department will only have 
viewing rights on the system.
22.0  ROLE OF DEANS OF THE SCHOOLS
a)  The Deans of Schools are responsible for: 
i)     Creating examination strong rooms and marking Centres which offers 
security of examination. 
ii)    Entering all Units’ marks on the candidate record system by the date 
specified in the assessment calendar.
iii)    Making all practical arrangements for meetings including External 
Examiners’ accommodation.
iv)    Notifying any other relevant offices of changes in the provisional marks 
made at the Subject Area Board.
v) Informing the Senate Examinations Office of the date, time and location 
of all Examination Boards, and sending to the Senate Examinations Office 
the full agenda for each award and progression.
vi)    Providing a Minutes Recorder for every Examination Board meeting.
b)   Presenting examination results from the Departments in the 
School, to the College Academic Board for Approval.
23.0  THE ROLE OF THE ACADEMIC REGISTRAR’S 
DEPARTMENT 
i)  Coordination and Monitoring of all Examination processes to ensure the 
achievement of the evaluation programme.
ii)  Declaring of the results and their safe re- cord-keeping;
[[page:119]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
115
iii)  Providing reports to Senate 
iv)  Issuing of the Academic Transcripts and Certificates 
v)  Providing Secretariat to the School Boards, College Academic Boards, 
Senate Committees, and the Senate.
24.0  PUBLICATION OF RESUL TS 
The relevant department shall publish Provisional Examination Results of 
candidates in every examination soon after the meeting of departmental 
Examination Committee. The said Examination Results shall be arranged and 
published in a manner as prescribed by Senate. 
25.0    CONCEDED PASS
25.1   Definition of Conceded Pass
i) A “Conceded Pass” is a pass granted for a course in which a final year 
candidate is within five marks of a pass mark in the course assessment. 
The pass is conceded on the basis that the student’s overall performance 
in other courses for the programme has been sufficiently strong to 
counter the deficient percentage in that particular course.
ii)       Circumstances Potentially Warranting a Conceded Pass.
iii) The personal circumstances of a student must be taken into account. The 
student’s performance in the course could have been adversely affected 
by his/her personal circumstances. The circumstances for approval of a 
Conceded Pass may include but are not limited to:
a)     Student illness or Medical condition;
b)     Family issues (family injury or illness, bereavement etc.);
c) Commitments to participate in national sport or other activities 
that warrant favorable consideration;
d)     Commitments to assist with community service activities;
e)     Unavoidable and unexpected work commitments (e.g. relocation).
iv) Awarding conceded passes does not compromise the requirements for 
accreditation of that programme by a professional body.
v)      Responsibility and Procedure:
a) The Conceded Passes are granted at the discretion of the School’s 
Board of Examiners. Students are not automatically entitled to the 
Conceded Passes and shall not be entitled to apply for them.
b) The Board of Examiners shall during the time of consideration 
of examination results, identify and grant conceded passes to 
students eligible for the same. Such a Student will then be formally 
informed that he/she has been offered a Conceded Pass.
[[page:120]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
116
25.2   Eligibility for a Conceded Pass
A conceded pass shall be granted under the following conditions:
i) A candidate on Undergraduate Programme shall be eligible for a 
Conceded pass if the final mark in a Course is in the range of 45 – 49% 
inclusive and the Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) for the student 
will be at least 2.0.
ii) A Conceded Pass may only be awarded if a student has attempted that 
particular examination paper three (3) times. The better of the grades 
earned will be used for awarding a Conceded pass.
iii) A Conceded pass shall be discretionary and the Examination Boards shall 
take into account the following:
a) The results a student has scored each time he/she has attempted 
the paper. 
b) A student’s overall performance/Academic record
c) Comments from his/her lecturers including on class attendance, 
participation in class activities. 
d) Whether the course is required for professional accreditation; or it 
is necessary for a student to demonstrate professional or clinical 
competence as part of its assessment requirements
iv)      A Conceded Pass shall be granted to a whole course, not to a particular 
piece of assessment.
 v)   Candidates granted Conceded pass shall earn a credit on the basis of 
Conceded Pass “CP’’ 
vi)      Only candidates in their final year of studies shall be eligible for grant of 
a Conceded pass.
ix) In both undergraduate and postgraduate programmes, a conceded pass 
can only be awarded ONCE in a candidate’s program life-time 
x) In case a Candidate does not qualify for a conceded pass as stipulated 
above, he/she will be discontinued in accordance with section 28(b).
25.3   Recording a Conceded Pass on the Academic transcript
A granted Conceded Pass will be recorded on the student’s academic Transcript 
by indicating the true percentage /grade achieved, and “CP” as the grading code.
26.0 GRADING OF MARKS
The overall Marks a candidate obtains in each Course offered shall be graded 
out of a maximum of One hundred (100) marks and assigned appropriate letter 
Grades and Grade Points as follows:
[[page:121]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
117
TABLE 1: GRADING OF THE COURSES
Marks Letter Grade Grade Point Interpretation
90-100 A+ 5.0 Exceptional
80-89 A 5.0 Excellent
75-79 B+ 4.5 Very Good
70-74 B 4.0 Very Good
65-69 C+ 3.5 Good
60-64 C 3.0 Fairly Good
55-59 D+ 2.5 Fair
50-54 D 2.0 Pass
Below 50 - 0 Fail
a. A+: Exceptional: Thorough knowledge of concepts and/or techniques 
and exceptional skill or great originality in the use of concepts/
techniques in satisfying the requirements of an Assignment or course.
b. A: Excellent: Thorough knowledge of concepts and/or techniques 
together with a high degree of skill and/or some elements of originality 
in satisfying the requirements of an Assignment or course.
c. B+: Very Good: Thorough knowledge of concepts and/or techniques 
together with fairly high degree of skills in the use of those concepts/
techniques in satisfying the requirements of an Assignment or course.
d. B+: Very Good: Thorough knowledge of concepts and/or techniques 
together with fairly high degree of skills in the use of those concepts/
techniques in satisfying the requirements of an Assignment or course.
e. C+: Good: Acceptable level of knowledge of concepts and/or 
techniques together with considerable skill in using them to satisfy the 
requirements of an Assignment or course.
f. C: Fairly Good: Acceptable level of knowledge of concepts and/
or techniques together with some skill in using them to satisfy the 
requirements of an Assignment or course.
g. D+: Fair: Slightly better than minimum knowledge of required concepts 
and/or techniques together with some ability to use them in satisfying 
the requirements of an Assignment or course.
h. D: Pass: Minimum knowledge of concepts and/or techniques needed 
to satisfy the requirements of an Assignment or course.
i. F: Fail:  not reflected in the grading table
 Students will be informed about the importance of attending lectures and signing 
the attendance register. (Certificate of due performance  shall be embedded 
within the progressive assessment and each department has a minimum 
requirement needed and it’s within the approved curriculum)
[[page:122]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
118
27.0.    CLASSIFICATION
For purposes of the classification of Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates (where 
applicable) the Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) for the various Classes 
shall be as indicated below:
Class CGPA
First Class 4.40 - 5.00
Second Class – Upper Division 3.60 - 4.39
Second Class - Lower Division 2.80 - 3.59
Pass 2.0  - 2.79
28.0    AWARDS
The Board of Examiners in a School, upon its satisfaction that the standard required 
under relevant regulations for the award of a Degree, Diploma, Certificate or 
other award, as the case may be, has been attained by a candidate in University 
examinations applicable to him/her, may recommend to the Senate through the 
relevant Academic Board of a College that such Degree, Diploma, Certificate or 
other award be conferred upon or granted to such successful candidate.
29.0  RETENTION AND DISPOSITION OF EXAMINATION 
SCRIPTS
The following measures shall be applied in handling examination scripts;
(a) Academic Units should store/retain all assessment examination scripts 
of students for a period of the duration of an academic programme 
for purposes of addressing any complaints or appeals and Quality 
Assurance.
(b) That it is the responsibility of each Dean to ensure that Examination 
Scripts are disposed of in a secure and appropriate manner at the 
end of the defined period which is two (2) academic years/ Four (4) 
Semesters after the final semester examination in accordance with the 
academic records and management policy. 
(c) That all the Academic Units should ensure prompt return of coursework 
scripts/assignments/class tests at least not later than two weeks before 
the beginning of the semester Final Examinations to enable students 
to know their progress and/or learn from past mistakes
[[page:123]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
119
30.0  REMARKING STUDENTS’ WORK 
Guidelines for handling students who are dissatisfied with their marks are as 
follows:
(a) A candidate wishing to make any appeal against his/her examination 
results shall do so within 30 days from the date of publication of the 
final results.
(b) All appeals for re-marking shall be addressed to the chairperson of the 
School Examinations Irregularities and Malpractices Committee and a 
copy given to the Lecturer concerned.
(c) Candidates shall make their requests in writing clearly specifying the 
grounds upon which the appeal is being made including, but not 
limited to the following:
(i) Miscomputation of Marks
(ii) Bias on the part of the Lecturer
(iii) Marks generally out of step with one’s over-all performance.
(d) The School Examinations Irregularities committee shall:
a)  Identify another member of the academic staff in the Department 
who shall be at the same rank or higher than the lecturer who 
marked before,
b)  Provide a marking guide for him/her to mark the script,
c)  Communicate its decisions to the affected student within a period 
of 14 days of its deliberations.
(e) From the time the decision to remark is made by the School 
Examinations Irregularities Committee, remarking shall be completed 
within two weeks and the new mark awarded shall be approved by the 
Dean on behalf of the School’s Examinations Board.
(f ) If a candidate decides to withdraw his/her appeal before it is considered 
by the Committee, such withdrawal shall be done in writing.
(g) There is a fee required for remarking.
(h) The mark obtained after remarking is the mark that shall be used.
  In case the student is dissatisfied with the marks after the remark by 
the School, he/she shall have a right of appeal to the College Appeals 
and Irregularities Committee.
[[page:124]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
120
POLICY ON APPEALS BY STUDENTS
a)  That the Examinations Irregularities Committees of Schools have been 
mandated by the Senate to handle cases of examinations malpractices 
and communicate their decisions to the concerned students.
b)  In their communication to students who would have been DISMISSED, 
the following clause should be mentioned ‘in case you are not 
satisfied with the verdict, you are free to appeal directly to the Senate 
Examinations Committee. ’
c)  The Examinations Irregularities Committees of Schools shall then 
communicate the decisions taken to the Senate Examinations 
Committee for noting.
d)  Students who wish to appeal are required to submit their appeal 
letters to the Secretariat of the Senate Examinations Committee.
e)  The Senate Examinations Committee Secretariat upon receipt of the 
appeal shall request the respective School to comment on the appeal. 
(to give information on the case that might be missing).
f )  The Senate Examinations Committee shall consider the merits of the 
student’s appeals, and handle as appropriate.
31.0  GENERAL RULE FOR POSSESSION OF FIREARMS
It shall be an offence for any student without authorization/permission or 
disclosure to the university security organs to:
a)  Be in possession of firearms or other potentially lethal weapons on 
University property and halls of residence.
b)  Use a firearm or any potentially lethal weapon on University property 
and halls of residence.
c)  Appear on University property or halls of residence wearing a law 
enforcement security uniform.
Penalty
iv)  Caution, or
v)  Suspension for a period not exceeding two academic years, or
vi)  Dismissal from the University without prejudice to any action that may 
be pursued in a court of law.
[[page:125]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
121
RULES ON EXAMINATION MALPRACTICES 
AND IRREGULARITIES 
Rule 1: Malpractices in Relation to Coursework
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate to avail to another student/candidate 
his/her prepared coursework with a view to assisting the latter to do his/her 
coursework or to negligently expose his/her coursework to another candidate to 
use.
Penalty
Any student/candidate found guilty of the offence under Rule. 1 above shall be 
liable to: 
i) Caution and Cancellation of his/her coursework, or 
ii) Caution and Cancellation of his/her coursework and suspension from 
his/her studies for a period not exceeding one academic year (Two 
semesters).
Rule 2: Fraud in Relation to Coursework
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate/ students working in a group to:
(a) Submit coursework not prepared by him/her.
(b) Substantially plagiarise the work of any other person.
(c) Solicit/purchase any coursework from any other person.
(d) Falsify/alter marks awarded on a coursework script.
Penalty
Any student/candidate found guilty of involvement in fraudulent conduct related 
to coursework as set out in Rule. 2 above shall be liable to: 
i) Caution and Cancellation of his/her/group coursework, or in case of 
an individual course work it should be cancelled and a student given 
another coursework at a cost. Both the recipients should be penalized
ii) Cancellation of his/her coursework and suspension from his/her studies 
for a period not exceeding one academic year (Two semesters), or 
iii) Cancellation of his/her coursework and dismissal from the University.
[[page:126]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
122
Rule 3: Malpractices in the Conduct of Examinations
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate involved in an examination/test to:
(a) Sit or attempt to sit the examination without valid documentation.
(b) Enter the examination hall/room later than half an hour after the 
examination/test has commenced.
(c) Leave the examination hall/room earlier than half an hour after the 
examination has commenced except in emergencies with the express 
permission of the Invigilator.
(d) Carry out a conversation or any other communication with another 
student/candidate once the examination has commenced.
(e) Indulge in any disruptive conduct including, but not limited to, 
shouting, assault of another student/candidate, using abusive and /
or threatening language, destruction of University property or the 
property of another student/candidate.
(f ) Take out of the examination room/hall answer booklet(s), used or 
unused.
(g) Neglect, omit or in any other way fail to follow lawful instructions or 
orders issued by the Invigilator.
(h) Physically assault or insult an Invigilator or any University Official 
involved in the conduct of the examination. 
(i) Share information with another student while using a computer/ 
electronic gadget for an examination.
(j) Carry away equipment and materials used in a practical examination. 
All equipment and materials used in the examination remain University 
property and must remain within the examination room.  
Penalty
Any student/candidate found guilty of contravening Rule 3 above, shall be liable 
to: 
i) Caution and Cancellation of the relevant examination, or  
ii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension from the 
University for a period not exceeding two academic years (Four 
semesters), or  
iii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and dismissal from the 
University.  
iv) A student/candidate who contravenes Rule 3(e) involving destruction of 
property shall be liable to a fine as well as any penalty specified above. 
v) A Government-sponsored student/candidate found guilty of 
contravening Rule 3. above, may have the Government sponsorship
[[page:127]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
123
cancelled besides any other punishment, taking into account the gravity 
of the offence. 
vi) Any student/candidate found guilty of contravening Rule 3(h) above 
by physically assaulting an Invigilator or a University Official shall be 
dismissed from the University.  
Rule 4: Cheating in an Examination
It shall be an offence for any student/candidate involved in an examination to:
(a) Take into the examination room/hall, in person or by agent, 
unauthorized materials including, but not limited to, plain papers, 
condensed/summarized notes, books, and handkerchiefs on which 
information is written or information written on any part of the body, 
recording apparatus, mobile phones/smart watches/other electronic 
gadgets/ smart gadgets or any unauthorized electronic equipment.  
(b) Copy from any other candidate/student.
(c) Involve oneself in plagiarism, that is:
(i) Pass off the words or ideas of someone else as his/her own without 
proper acknowledgement or crediting the original source.
(ii) Replicate one’s own work which one has presented elsewhere for 
assessment.
(d) Aid and/ or abet another candidate/student to copy from a script/ 
book of another person.
(e) Exchange answers with another candidate/student in or outside the 
examination room.
(f ) Collaborate with another candidate/student in the examination room 
or outside to use telephone discussions and share material including 
calculators and use of other electronic equipment.
Penalty
Any student/candidate found guilty of cheating in examinations as defined above 
shall be liable to: 
(i) Caution and Cancellation of the relevant examination, or  
(ii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension from the 
University for a period not exceeding two years, or  
(iii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and dismissal from the 
University.  
(iv) A Government-sponsored student/candidate found guilty of 
contravening Rule 4 above, may have the Government sponsorship 
cancelled besides any other punishment.
[[page:128]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
124
(v) Any student/candidate found guilty of cheating in examinations on 
second conviction shall be dismissed from the University.
(vi) On conclusion of the malpractice case with a hearing and judgment 
made, the confiscated unauthorized material (exhibits) shall be 
destroyed. In case of valuable personal equipment such as phones and 
other electronic gadgets, the information on such items that is related to 
the malpractice case shall be downloaded and the equipment returned 
to the offender after the case has been concluded and the offender has 
duly acknowledged the verdict.
(vii) Where several paragraphs or ideas have been plagiarized the student 
shall be cautioned/ warned and shall not be awarded any grade higher 
than “D” regardless of the outcome of the final assessment of the 
submitted work.
(viii) On a second charge of the offence of plagiarism as defined in (a) above, 
the examination shall be cancelled, the student awarded a grade “F” 
for the submitted work and suspended for a period not exceeding one 
academic year (two semesters).
(ix) Where the entire material has been lifted from another source verbatim 
or with only slight alterations the examination/ work shall be cancelled 
and student shall be suspended from the University for a period of two 
academic years.
(x) On a third and subsequent time of the offence of plagiarism as defined in 
(a) above, the student shall be dismissed from the University.
Rule 5: Fraud in Examinations and Examination Results (As amended by Sen-
ate on 13th November, 2014)
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate involved in an examination to:
(a) Import into the examination hall/room, in person or by an agent, a pre-
prepared answer script/booklet;
(b) Substitute an answer script/booklet prepared outside the examination 
room/hall for the one already submitted to the Invigilator/Examiner;
(c) Falsify or altering marks awarded on an examination script/book; after 
course work; Viva voce/Public defense or final board of examiners’ 
meeting; testimonial, field work report or to procure someone to 
alter marks awarded on an examination script/book or coursework or 
assessment record;
(d) Impersonate another student/candidate;
(e) Procure or induce another person to sit for him/her;
(f ) Utter false documents in relation to eligibility to sit University 
examinations, including but not limited to; examination permit, 
financial statement, bank slip, registration card, logbooks, case reports 
or attendance list;
[[page:129]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
125
(g) Sit or attempt to sit an examination without authority;
(h) Deliver to the examiner’s office or residence an examination script/
booklet outside the scheduled time for delivery without due authority;
(i) fraudulently receive examination papers/questions which have been 
illegally procured or made available;
(j) Fraudulently access or attempt to access examination questions before 
the examination is due;
(k) Pay or induce another person to illegally procure or make available 
examination questions/papers.
(l) Pay or procure a member of staff or non-member of staff to alter 
examination results.
(m) Student(s) writing false information or altering names on the answer 
booklet, on the examination attendance list or examination script with 
Intention to hide his/her identity. 
(n) Student(s) smuggling/attempting to smuggle examination booklet 
out of the examination venue having signed the register and later 
claiming that his/her marks are missing
(o) Student(s) unlawfully retrieving examination materials from University 
custody for purposes of falsifying results/marks.
Penalty for Rule No. 5
Any student/candidate found guilty of fraudulent conduct as defined above shall 
be liable to:
(i) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension from the 
University for a period not exceeding two Academic Years; or
(ii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and dismissal from the 
University;
(iii) A government sponsored student/any other University related sponsored 
student found guilty of contravening Rule 5 is liable to cancellation of the 
sponsorship;
(iv) If a member of staff is procured to alter examination results, he/she 
should be handed over for disciplinary processes and action provided for 
under the Human Resources Manual and Public Service Standing Orders;
(v) If the person procured is not a member of staff, he/she should be handed 
over to police.
[[page:130]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
126
Rule 6.   Offences Relating to the Conduct of Irregularities Hearing
It shall be an offence for any student/candidate whether or not he /she has been 
accused of an irregularity to:
(a) Interfere with the conduct of investigations into the matter or the 
hearing of an irregularity by the School or College Irregularities 
Committee.
(b) Intimidate members of the Committee or other members of the 
University Staff or witnesses in the irregularity matter.
(c) Destroy evidence relating to an alleged irregularity.  
(d) Forge or utter false documents in relation to an alleged irregularity.  
(e) Bribe or attempt to bribe a University Official witness or any other 
person in relation to an alleged irregularity.
(f ) Harass or procure others to harass on his /her behalf a University official, 
witnesses or any other person in relation to an irregularity by making 
constant telephone calls, visits, or any form of influence peddling etc.
Penalty
Any student/candidate found guilty of interference with the conduct of an 
irregularity hearing as defined in Rule 6 above shall be liable to:
(i) Cancellation of the relevant examinations, or
(ii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and suspension from the 
University for a period not exceeding one academic year, or 
(iii) Cancellation of the relevant examinations and dismissal from the 
University.
Rule 6  A Possessions of Firearms during the examination period
It shall be an offence for a student/candidate involved in an examination/test to:
(a) Bring within the precincts of the examination room any firearm or 
potentially dangerous weapon.
(b) Use a firearm or any potentially dangerous weapon with the purpose 
to intimidate, threaten or otherwise deter investigations into any 
examination irregularity.
Penalty
Any student found guilty of the offence defined in Rule 6A(a) shall be liable to:
i) Caution and cancellation of the relevant examination, or
ii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and suspension for a period not 
exceeding two years, or
[[page:131]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
127
iii) Cancellation of the relevant examination and dismissal from the 
University.
NOTE: The term “potentially lethal weapon/substances” for purposes of Rule 6A 
includes, but is not limited to, guns, pangas, machetes, daggers, switch blades, spears, 
swords, bows & arrows, brass knuckles and any incendiary device.  This definition also 
includes imitations of potentially dangerous and threatening items such as fake guns.  
Rule 7 Mitigating and Aggravating Factors When Determining the Appropri-
ate Punishment  
Where the Rule provides a range of punishments, the Committee may take into 
account the following mitigating and aggravating factors in determining the 
appropriate punishment.
(a) Mitigating Factors.
(i) Remorse on the part of the student/candidate.
(ii) Truthfulness
(iii) Lack of substantial benefit from the malpractice
(iv) Student/candidate first offender
(v) Plea of guilty therefore not wasting the Committee’s time.
(b) Aggravating Factors.
(i) Substantial benefit from the malpractice.
(ii) Lack of credibility.
(iii) General misconduct.
(iv) Frivolous and vexatious denials.
(v) Allegations of misconduct on the part of University staff which are 
subsequently proved to be false.
(vi) Second conviction.
Rule 8: Procedure for Hearing of Malpractice Cases 
(1) GUIDELINES ON APPREHENSION OF A SUSPECT
When a student/candidate is suspected to be engaging in examination 
malpractices, the following should be done:
(a) A suspect should be handled in the appropriate manner to ensure 
that the privacy and bodily integrity of a person is not violated. Body 
searches should be done in the presence of another person.
(b) The materials should be taken away as soon as they are found and kept 
as exhibits.
(c) Identity of the suspect and possible witnesses should be recorded
[[page:132]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
128
immediately.
(d) A suspect should be allowed to proceed with the examination since 
he/she is presumed to be innocent until proved guilty. 
(2) RULES OF NATURAL JUSTICE
In the handling of examination irregularities and malpractices, the Colleges/
School Committee shall take into account the following principles of natural 
justice:
(a) Fair and equal treatment of all students/candidates,
(b) The opportunity to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty,
(c) Fair hearing accorded to all students/candidates,
(d) Right of students/candidates to appear and to defend themselves,
(e) Staff not to sit in judgment of their own cause, and
(f ) Consistency in punishments.
(3) PRE- HEARING
(a) The Member of Staff who alleges that a student/candidate was 
involved in a malpractice shall make a formal written report to the 
Chairperson of the School Committee. Any materials allegedly found 
on the student/candidate should be given to the Chairperson for safe 
custody.
(b) The Chairperson of the Committee shall inform the student/candidate 
in writing of the allegation. A copy of the Rules shall be availed to the 
student/candidate with the letter of the Chairperson.
(c) The student/candidate shall be allowed to make a formal defence 
to the allegations in writing addressed to the Chairperson of the   
Committee.
(d) The student/candidate shall then be invited in writing or by whatever 
expedient method to appear before the Committee to defend himself/
herself.
(e) The student/candidate shall be given Seven (7) days’ notice of the date 
of appearing before the College/School Committee to enable him/her 
time to prepare his/her defence.
(f ) A student/candidate who fails or refuses or omits to appear after being 
effectively summoned three times shall be suspended indefinitely from 
the University pending his/her appearance before the Committee.
[[page:133]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
129
(g) The suspension in (f ) above shall remain in place until the Chairperson 
of the Committee formally notifies the Academic Registrar that the 
student/candidate has appeared and answered the allegations.
(h) A student/candidate alleged to have been involved in examination 
malpractice shall not be registered until such a time that the case has 
been disposed of.
(4) HEARING
(a) The College Academic Board shall appoint the Appeals and 
Examinations Irregularities Committee. The College Appeals and 
Examinations Irregularities Committee shall be constituted by 
the Chairperson and six other members. The membership of the 
Committee shall be drawn from the Deans, Chairs of Departments 
or any other senior academic staff in case the Deans and Chairs are 
already members of the lower Committee. Quorum of the Committee 
shall be five members present.
NOTE: (i)  The membership and quorum should be determined in such a way as to 
ensurethat members do not sit in judgement of their own cases.
 (ii)  The Board of Studies in each School should determine the membership of 
the School Irregularities and Malpractices Committee.
(b) The student/candidate shall appear in person before the Committee 
and identify himself/herself as the subject of the proceedings. The 
Member of Staff /Invigilator concerned should also be present.
(c) The Committee shall formally charge the student/candidate. The 
student/candidate shall be informed by the prosecutor of the 
allegations against him/her and the Rule in the Rules on Examination 
Malpractices and Irregularities he/she is alleged to have breached. In 
addition, he/she shall be informed of the possible punishments.
(d) The student/candidate shall formally respond to such allegations.
(e) When the student/candidate responds in the affirmative, a plea of 
guilty shall be recorded by the prosecutor.
(i) On a plea of guilty, the Member of Staff/Invigilator reporting the 
malpractice shall present the facts constituting the malpractice to 
the Committee in the presence of the student/candidate.
(ii) Where the student/candidate is alleged to have been found with 
unauthorized materials, the materials shall be brought before the 
Committee and the Member of Staff making the report shall state 
formally in the presence of the student/candidate whether they 
are the materials he/she is alleged to have found in the possession 
of the student/candidate.
[[page:134]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
130
(iii) The student/candidate shall be given an opportunity to respond to 
allegations of fact. He/she may disagree with them and he/she has a right 
to cross-examine the person making the report.
(iv) Where the student/candidate responds to the allegations of facts and 
the Committee is of the considered opinion that in substance he/she is 
pleading not guilty, it shall direct that a plea of not guilty be substituted 
for the plea of guilty. 
(v) Where the student/candidate admits the offence with an explanation or 
makes a plea that is vague the Committee should record a plea of not 
guilty.  
(vi) The student/candidate shall be allowed to plead mitigating factors, which 
the Committee should take into account in prescribing punishment.
(vii) The Committee shall then deliberate in the absence of the student/
candidate and the Member of Staff/Invigilator making the report.
(viii) A decision shall be made with regard to the punishment and reasons 
should be assigned for such a decision. 
(ix) The report shall be forwarded to the College Examinations Committee 
for information for any other decisions apart from dismissal.  Where, on 
the face of the record, the College Examinations Committee realises that 
the School Committee erred in its decisions, the College Examinations 
Committee has a right to review the decision.
(f ) On a plea of not guilty by the student/candidate, the Member of Staff/
Invigilator making the report shall present the facts to the Committee 
with the guidance of the prosecutor in the presence of the student/
candidate who has a right of cross-examination.
(i) The Member of Staff/Invigilator reporting the malpractice shall present 
the facts constituting the malpractice to the Committee in the presence 
of the student/candidate.
(ii) Where the student/candidate is alleged to have been found with 
unauthorised materials, the materials shall be brought before the 
Committee and the Member of Staff making the report shall state 
formally in the presence of the student/candidate whether they are 
the materials he/she is alleged to have found in the possession of the 
student/candidate.
(iii) The student/candidate shall be given an opportunity to respond to 
allegations of fact. He/she may disagree with them and he/she has a right 
to cross-examine the person making the report.
(g) The prosecutor may call witnesses whose presence he/she considers 
important for the just and fair disposal of the case.
(h) The student/candidate shall present his/her defence to the Committee 
in the presence of the Member of Staff who made the report who also 
has a right of cross-examination.
[[page:135]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
131
(i) The student/candidate may call witnesses to substantiate his/her 
defence.
(5) NATURE OF  EVIDENCE GENERAL
(a) The Committee may admit oral and material evidence, which may be 
direct or circumstantial.
NOTE:   Direct evidence is the account of the eyewitnesses or the 
original documents while circumstantial evidence is that which is inferred from the 
circumstances of the case e.g. the student/candidate running away when approached 
by an Invigilator.
(b) The Committee may not admit hearsay evidence unless there is 
independent evidence that lends it credence.
NOTE:   Hearsay evidence is indirect in the sense that it is given by a 
person who was not an eye witness e.g. where a witness reports what was told to her/
him by another person or photocopies of documents produced where the original is 
not produced with no adequate explanation as to why. Such evidence should only be 
accepted where there is other direct evidence which supports the hearsay.
(c) After the close of the evidence and before a decision is made, the 
student/candidate shall be given an opportunity to present to the 
Committee mitigating factors. 
(6) POST-HEARING
(a) The School Committee shall deliberate on the matter preferably on the 
same day as the hearing.
(b) The School Committee shall make findings of fact with respect to 
the evidence and make a decision e.g. suspension, discontinuation, 
dismissal etc. based on those facts. The School Committee must assign 
reasons for each decision.
(c) The student/candidate shall be officially informed of such decision/ 
verdict of the School Committee, and may on request be availed a 
record of the proceedings.
(d) The proceedings of the School Committee deliberations, decisions and 
the signed record should be forwarded to the College Registrar and 
the Academic Registrar.  
(e) The student/candidate shall be informed of his/her right of appeal and 
the procedure to be followed.  
(f ) A student/candidate who has been suspended/discontinued/
dismissed shall cease to be a bona fide student and shall not be 
accorded teaching and learning services. He/she however, has recourse 
to appeal to the College Appeals and Irregularities Committee provided
[[page:136]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
132
he/she lodges his/her appeal after leaving the School/Institute on 
receipt of the communication.
(7) APPEAL PROCEDURES
(a) A student/candidate who is dissatisfied with the decision of a School 
Committee may appeal to the College Appeals and Examinations 
Irregularities Committee within 30 days from the date of the letter 
communicating the decision.  
(b) The appeal shall be in writing addressed to the College Registrar and 
copied to the Chairperson of School Committee stating clearly the 
grounds of appeal. The College Registrar, on receipt of the appeal, 
shall acknowledge by endorsing a copy for the student/candidate and 
forwarding a copy to Chairperson of School Committee.
(c) A student/candidate who pleaded guilty to an offence before the 
School Committee shall have a right of appeal only with respect to the 
penalty.
(d) The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee shall 
hear the appeal expeditiously. The student/candidate appealing shall 
be notified in writing of the date when the appeal will be heard and 
should be given an opportunity to appear before the College Appeals 
and Examinations Irregularities Committee and be heard.
(e) The College Registrar shall officially notify the School Committee that 
made the decision in the first instance of the date of hearing of the 
appeal. The School/Institute Committee shall have a right to be heard
(f ) At the hearing of the appeal, the student/candidate shall have an 
opportunity to be heard and the School Committee shall have a right 
to respond to the student/candidate’s presentation.
(g) The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee shall 
have power on cause being shown to allow the student/candidate 
present additional evidence before it.
(h) Where additional witnesses are called, they will be subject to cross-
examination by the representative of the School Committee. The 
School Committee may also adduce additional evidence, which shall 
be responded to by the student/candidate.
(i) The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee will 
thereafter deliberate the decision in the absence of the student/
candidate and School Committee representative preferably on the 
date of hearing.
(j) The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee may 
confirm, vary or set aside the decision of the School Committee.
(k) The College Appeals and Examinations Irregularities Committee shall
[[page:137]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
133
take into account the rules of natural justice set out in Rule 8(2) of 
these Rules.
(l) A student/candidate who is dissatisfied with the decision of the College 
Appeals and Examination Irregularities Committee may appeal to the 
higher and final Senate Academic Policies and Appeals Committee 
within 30 days from the date of the letter communicating the decision. 
The decision of Academic Policies and Appeals Committee shall be 
final. 
(8) TIMEFRAME FOR HEARING AND CONCLUDING CASES 
AND APPEALS
(a) Trial of cases at the School level should be concluded within 4 weeks 
after completion of that semester examinations period. 
(b) Appeals at College level should be completed within one (1) month.  
After the expiry of the one month allowed for one to appeal the 
decision of the School Committee.
(c) The appeal process at the Senate Committee should not last more 
than one (1) month or not later than the next scheduled meeting of 
the Senate Committee, whichever comes earlier.
(d) When a student appeals, the verdict of the lower committee shall 
remain in force, and he/ she shall wait for the appeal to be disposed of 
before proceeding to another semester/ level.
(e) The Senate Committee shall be the final level of a student’s appeal.
[[page:138]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
134
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR 
EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
1.0  THE ROLES OF EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
The principle roles of external examiners include:
a)  To verify that standards are appropriate for of each unit of study and to 
provide independent impartial comment on standards set and student 
achievement of those standards. The capacity to fulfill this is based on 
knowledge of standards set and achieved in other higher education 
institutions, of subject benchmark statements and where applicable of 
the expectations of Professional and Statutory Bodies or coawarding 
bodies.
b)  To verify that the process of deciding assessment outcomes for 
individual students is fair, fairly operated, and in line with the 
University’s regulations
1.1  SPECIFIC ROLES
Arising out of the principle roles of external examiners the specific roles and 
responsibilities of external examiners are:
1.  Make judgments independent of the internal examiners 
2.  Have powers to recommend to the School Board the adjustment of marks for 
individual or all students examined
3.  Have access to the assessed parts of the programme (student scripts and 
coursework)
4.  Determine the method and extent of sampling of students’ work to scrutinize
5.  May recommend to the School Board for the remarking of a student’s script
6.  Select students for and determine the nature of VIVA VOCE’
7.  Check cases of suspected cheating
8.  Endorse marks and pass lists before they are published
9.  The external Examiner should in specific cases the extent to which medical 
and other extenuation circumstances were taken into account.
2.  NOMINATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS
An external examiner shall have at least one year of recent examining experience, 
including external examining experience, to assure the School Examinations 
Board and Senate of his/her competence in assessment and understanding of 
academic standards in a broad higher education context.
[[page:139]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
135
Qualities of External Examiner
The external examiner should be a critical friend so as to offer constructive 
comments, criticism and suggestions for enhancement in the area of assessment 
practice. An External Examiner shall be an Academic Professor or Senior Lecturer 
or practicing professional at the rank of consultant or the equivalent.
The process of nomination and appointment of external examiners shall be as 
follows:
a)  The head of relevant department through informal contacts shall 
establish willingness and availability of nominee to serve as external 
examiner and solicit his/her Curriculum Vitae
b)  The academic members of the department shall study the Curriculum 
Vitae to satisfy themselves that the nominee has the necessary 
expertise, experience and seniority to serve as external examiner.
c)  External examiners for Undergraduate Programmes shall be appointed 
by the University Senate or the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic 
Affairs) on the recommendation of the respective School Board.
d)  External examiners for Graduate Programmes shall be appointed 
by the Board of  Research and Graduate Training or the Deputy 
Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) on the recommendation of the 
respective School Board.
e)  External examiners shall be appointed to serve for a period of three 
years with a possible one-year extension.
f )  Thereafter the same external examiner shall not be re-appointed until 
a period of one (1) year has elapsed.
g)  A former member of the teaching staff of the University will not be 
eligible for appointment until a period of three (3) years has elapsed
h)  An external examiner will not be appointed from a department in 
which a member of staff of the relevant department at Makerere 
University is serving as an external Examiner or teaching.
[[page:140]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
136
3.  STATUS OF EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
External examiners shall be Ex-Officio members of the relevant Examiners’ Boards.
4.  INFORMATION TO BE AVAILED TO THE EXTERNAL 
EXAMINERS
The host department will send to the newly appointed external examiner the 
following information:
i.  Programme and course aims, objectives and syllabuses
ii.  Copies of past examination papers
iii.  Methods of assessment/Marking Scheme
iv.  Ways in which marks of individual parts of the examination are 
aggregated, averaged to produce the final result
v.  The method by which the pass mark (cutoff point) at and above which 
students are pronounced passed and below which they are declared to 
have failed. The two alternatives are:
a.  Absolute or Criterion Reference Test where the pass mark is set and 
students scoring below that fail regardless of the number.
b.  Relative or Norm Reference Test method where the pass mark can 
vary depending on students’ performance.
vi.  Proposed dates of departmental and faculty examiners’ board meetings 
vii.  The external examiner should be given a face to face briefing
viii.  The route by which external examiners can raise matters that are 
important and of a sensitive nature is by making a confidential report to 
the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs)
5.  FACILITATING AND HOSTING
The following shall be done to facilitate and streamline the work of External 
Examiners:
a)  A return air ticket and in country transportation arrangements should 
be made well in advance.
b)  The external examiners should be met by University support staff  
whose role is to collect and deliver External Examiners to their 
prearranged accommodation.
c)  Per Diem or out of pocket allowance should be paid to External 
Examiners on arrival.
d)  Any refunds for transit expenses should be processed in a timely 
fashion and paid to External Examiners before they depart for home.
[[page:141]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
137
e)  External Examiners should be given the scripts to look at upon arrival 
at their accommodation.
f )  Payment of examiners’ fees is authorized once the reports are received.
6.  MODERATION OF EXAMINATION PAPERS
The external examiner may review, moderate and approve all examination papers. 
Therefore:
a)  Draft examination papers may be sent to the external examiners well in 
advance allowing enough time for them to propose any modifications, 
they feel necessary
b)  Draft examination papers should be sent with marking schemes or 
model answers.
c)  External examiners may be invited to propose one or more questions 
to be included in the examination papers.
d)  Dissertations where appropriate will be sent to the External Examiner 
at least a month in advance.
e)  Care must be taken to safeguard the examination against leakage, and 
dissertations against loss
f )  Departments should always carry out internal moderation of 
examination questions.
7.  ACCESS TO WRITTEN SCRIPTS
Access to written scripts and coursework that contribute to the final assessment. 
External examiners will be given unfettered access to the following:
i.  All marked examination scripts
ii.  All evaluated coursework materials
8.  PARTICIPATION IN ORAL AND CLINICAL EXAMINATIONS
External examiners are required to participate in oral and clinical examination as 
follows:
a)  Where only a proportion of students are subjected to oral examination, 
the criteria for selection of those students should be agreed upon with 
the external examiner in advance.
b)  Be involved in the selection of content of the examination, in the 
marking and making final judgements
[[page:142]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
138
c)  The external examiner will be allowed to meet with the students 
examined to assess their opinion on the conduct of the examination 
process in case there is need.
9.  PARTICIPATION IN EXAMINATION BOARD MEETINGS
Aware that most of the courses in the first semester are prerequisites for most of 
the academic Programmes, external examiners will be invited during the second 
semester examination season  and the following will apply:
i.  He/she will attend the main Examiners’ Board meetings at which 
final examination results are reviewed and approved before they are 
published. 
ii.  With regard to the conduct of the Examiners’ Board meeting a formal 
minute must be kept noting the following:
a.  Members present
b.  The final decisions taken
c.  In specific cases the extent to which medical and other extenuating 
circumstances were taken into account
d.  Any general comments made by internal and external examiners
8.  EXTERNAL EXAMINERS’ REPORTS
External Examiners must annually make a report on the student assessment 
process to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) with a copy to the 
respective Departments and Schools.
The report must include answers which to some extent will act as indicators as 
to whether the students received the knowledge, skills, values expected to be 
provided by the respective courses. The external examiner’s report shall include 
the following:
i.  The Curriculum Design and its relevance
ii.  Comparability of the program with those offered in other institutions of 
Higher Education internationally.
iii.  Variability in the assessment process
iv.  Academic standards of awards
v.  Academic standards of student achievement.
[[page:143]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
139
In that respect the external examiner’s report will include answers to the following 
questions:
a)  Were the structure, content and methods of assessment used 
appropriate and adequate?
b)  How satisfactory was the administration of the examination process?
c)  Was the assessment process appropriate to the course (or subject); 
the level of students (1st, 2nd or third year or postgraduate); and 
competencies of interest?
d)  Were the examinations sufficiently comprehensive with regard to the 
programme or course being examined?
e)  Were the materials and facilities used for practicals and clinical 
examinations appropriate and adequate?
f )  Was the external examiner given adequate access to examination 
scripts of all borderline candidates and coursework for forming a 
reasonable opinion?
g)  Was the internal marking appropriate, fair and consistent?
h)  Was the Examiners’ Board meeting conducted in an impartial and fair 
manner?
i)  Was the programme structure, content and objectives well defined 
and appropriate to the subject matter and the level at which it was 
taught?
j)  Was the quality of teaching and methods used, as revealed by the 
examination, effective and appropriate?
k)  Was the general standard of performance of the students satisfactory 
and comparable to similar institutions?
l)  Was the failure rate acceptable or too high?
m) Was the distribution of honours comparable to other institutions
The External Examiners’ reports must:
a)  On completion of the exercise, the external examiner should submit 
his/her
 report directly to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) and 
copied to the respective Schools and Departments. The Deputy Vice-
Chancellor (Academic Affairs) will submit the report to the Quality 
Assurance Committee for consideration and action.
b)  The Quality Assurance Unit should ensure that the respective Schools 
and Departments attend to the concerns/ suggestions of the External 
Examiners. It is important to note that External examiners’ reports are 
part of the University’s annual quality assurance audit system.
[[page:144]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
140
9.  OTHER ROLES OF EXTERNAL EXAMINERS
External Examiners may be consulted on possible review of existing Programmes 
and the process of external examination for purposes of improving the assessment 
process.
10.  TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENTS
The appointment of an external examiner may be terminated by the School 
Board if the Board considers that the responsibilities of the appointment have not 
been or cannot be fulfilled in the manner or to the standard which the University 
requires. Reasons for termination may include, but not limited to:
i.  Failure to provide reports on the assessment process required by 
the University;
ii.  In the case of an examiner appointed to an Award and Progression 
Examination Board, inability to attend two successive such boards;
iii.  A change in the external examiner’s circumstances which brings 
about potential conflicts of interest which might jeopardize 
objectivity.
iv.  Persistent refusal to work within the University’s academic 
regulations;
v.  Conduct which in the case of an employee of the University would 
be the subject of disciplinary action;
a)  When circumstances arise which are considered as possible grounds 
for termination of an external examiner’s contract, the Chairperson 
of the Board of Examiners will notify the Deputy Vice- Chancellor 
(Academic Affairs) of the relevant details. The Deputy Vice-Chancellor 
(Academic Affairs) will write formally to the examiner to inform him/her 
that the termination is being considered and to offer the opportunity 
for the examiner to explain the circumstances and request that the 
termination is not effected.
b)  The Chairperson of the School Quality Assurance Committee, acting 
on behalf of the School Board, will take the final decision regarding the 
termination; the external examiner will be notified in writing of this 
decision. The Chairperson of the Quality Assurance Committee will 
inform the School Board of the circumstances of the case and of its 
outcome.
[[page:145]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
141
TEACHING AND LEARNING POLICY
1.  TEACHING CURRICULUM   
a) The teaching and learning of diploma and degree academic 
programmes shall be conducted basing on curricula approved by the 
University Senate and accredited by the National Council for Higher 
education (NCHE). 
b) The teaching and learning curriculum shall be consistent with the 
educational goals and aspirations of Uganda as may, from time to time 
be defined by the national development goals and agenda. 
c)  The Head/ Chairperson of Department and Dean of School shall 
be responsible for development and regular review of academic 
programmes and teaching curricula in accordance with the 
requirements of the Senate and the NCHE.  
d)  Account shall be taken in the design of every curriculum to ensure that 
the programme proposed: - 
  i)  Is broad-based or integrated;
 ii)  Is practical oriented;
 iii)  Is diversified;
 iv)  Does not compromise the standards of excellence set by the  
 National Council for higher Education (NCHE); and
 v)  Contributes to the overall national human resource   
 development and requirements (based on NCHE statutory  
 instruments 2005 No. 85)
e) The teaching and learning shall follow the approved programme 
structure, course sequencing, contact hours and credit units as 
stipulated and assigned in the approved curriculum. 
2.  TEACHING TIMETABLE
a) Teaching and learning shall follow a published Timetable schedule 
showing clearly the names of course facilitators, day and time of 
the week, and venue. In the case of online or blended teaching, the 
published Timetable should clearly indicate the dates and times when 
online lectures are planned to be conducted. 
b) Timetabling shall be the responsibility of Heads of Department 
assisted by a designated staff at the College and central administration 
for proper coordination.
[[page:146]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
142
c) Timetable should be published at the various College/ School notice 
boards and on the official online platform, at least two weeks before 
commencement of the semester/lectures.
d) Each College Principal shall submit a copy of the College timetable to 
the Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academic Affairs), and Academic Registrar 
two (2) weeks before the commencement of semester
3. ASSIGNMENT OF TEACHING WORKLOAD AND 
ACADEMIC DUTIES
a) Assignment of academic duties to staff shall be in line with the terms 
and conditions contained in the appointment letters to undertake 
such activities such as teaching, research, students supervision, 
examination, assessment, grading, outreach, resource mobilization 
etc.
b) Assignment of duties shall be based on the knowledge, qualifications 
and competencies of staff.
c) The Chairperson/Head of Department and Dean of School shall ensure 
that the teaching workload and other academic assignments are 
equitably distributed to all the academic staff in the department. 
d) Assignment of teaching workloads shall take into consideration of the 
requirements for each staff to have the minimum teaching loads of ten 
to twelve (10-12) contact hours out of the total of forty (40) workman 
hours required for each staff per week. The rest of the 28-30 workman 
hours shall be distributed to cover other academic assignments/ 
workloads such as: research and publication; students’ research 
and projects supervision; academic work review; examinations and 
assessment of academic work, projects, dissertations and theses; 
course curricula and programme development; students’ mentorship 
and career guidance; knowledge transfer and outreach.
e) The Chairperson/Head of Department and Dean of School shall ensure 
that all full-time academic staff have the minimum teaching workload, 
before assigning or distributing any academic duties to part-time or 
short term contract staff.
f ) Teaching extra-loads beyond the minimum contact hours and the 
other academic workloads beyond the 40 hours per week (as stated 
in (d) above) will be remunerated, subject to availability of funds and 
in accordance with the College budget provisions approved by the 
University Council. 
g) It is the duty of the Head of Department and Dean to ensure that each 
registered student in the department is attached to a mentor from 
among the academic staff in the academic unit to provide support to 
the students on career guidance, counseling and mentorship.
[[page:147]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
143
4. ACTUAL TEACHING 
a) It shall be the responsibility of the Deans of School and Heads of 
Department to ensure that qualified academic staff are assigned to 
teach the approved curricula.
b) Teaching and learning shall optimize learner-centered pedagogy 
methods and use of multimedia and digital technologies, in accordance 
with the established University policies and guidelines. 
c) The mode of teaching and learning shall follow blended modalities, 
having physical (in-person lectures) and online course instruction, in 
accordance with the Open, Distance and e-Learning (ODeL) policy and 
guidelines approved by the Senate.
d) For every course to be taught there shall be a course outline shared 
and explained to the learners at the commencement of teaching and 
learning.
e) It is a requirement that each course is assigned and taught by at least 
two (2) academic staff to ensure business continuity, teamwork and to 
enable diversity in sharing and uptake of knowledge, skill, experiences, 
mentorship and broader academic support to the learners. 
f ) Exemptions to team teaching above in 4(a) may be allowed in cases 
of limited skill capacity and for courses with peculiar specialization 
requirements.  In such cases the Head of Department with approval 
of the Dean may assign an individual to teach that course, but efforts 
must be made to ensure that capacity is built in the department to 
have more people facilitating a course. 
g) It shall be the responsibility of every academic staff assigned to teach 
a course to open a Course File with the Head of Department and from 
time to time provide all required information related to the Course file 
both soft and hard copy. The Course file shall be comprised of: 
a. Course outline,
b. Attendance list for coursework and examinations,
c. Course work question papers and marks, 
d. Examination question paper 
e. Examination marks and marking guides, 
f. Final marks and any other related information pertaining to the 
teaching of the course.
h) For courses to be online, at least ¾ of the content should be developed.
[[page:148]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
144
5. INDUCTION OF STAFF: 
a) It shall be the responsibility of the Head of Department to ensure that 
proper induction of academic staff entrusted with teaching is done.
b) All academic staff should receive training in pedagogy, training in 
supervision of research theses/dissertations and projects, and other 
relevant skills in instruction design and effective delivery of teaching 
and learning.
c) Refresher training should be conducted for academic staff every five 
years. 
6. ASSESSMENT
a) There shall be a fair and transparent system of assessment and grading 
of students work that involves, among other things, team teaching/
assessment, peer review and assessment, internal and external 
assessment as provided in the University’s general academic and 
examination regulations.
b) It shall be the responsibility of every academic staff/course Instructor 
who has taught a course to ensure marking and assessment, 
submission of results for approval by the Department and entering of 
the approved marks in the official results management system.
7. EVALUATION OF  TEACHING AND LEARNING
a) Evaluation of teaching and learning shall be the responsibility of the 
Directorate of Quality Assurance in liaison with the Deans and Heads 
of academic units.
b) Students’ shall be required to evaluate the teaching of courses 
undertaken per semester. 
c) The Quality Assurance Directorate shall develop and regularly review 
the tools and system applications to ensure effective evaluation of 
teaching and learning.
d) Quality Assurance Directorate shall provide feedback to the academic 
Heads of Department who will then discuss the outcome of the 
evaluation with the concerned academic staff.  This shall be in the two 
weeks of evaluation before the beginning of semester examinations.
e) The Director Quality Assurance shall provide periodic quarterly reports 
on teaching and learning to the University management through the 
Deputy Vice Chancellor Academic Affairs.
f ) Where there are perpetual performance concerns and challenges 
about the members of staff, the Director, Quality Assurance will report 
to the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs) for appropriate 
action.
[[page:149]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
145
8. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY OF STUDENTS AND STAFF
a) Staff
i) All academic staff shall at all times uphold ethical, professional 
conduct and academic integrity in the execution of their duties in 
accordance with the University regulations and code of conduct.
ii) Staff infringing on ethical, professional and academic integrity 
shall be referred for disciplinary process to the relevant organs of 
the University as per the established rules and regulations.
b) Student 
i) All students admitted and registered on the University academic 
programmes receive admission letters and joining instructions, 
wherein, each automatically undertakes to abide by all University 
regulations; and failure of which, each shall be liable to disciplinary 
process and sanctions provided for in the regulations.
ii) Every syllabus/ course outline should have a statement on the 
expectations of the University from the student e.g., on honesty 
and anti-plagiarism as follows:
“By becoming a student at Makerere University, you agreed to conform to the 
University’s regulations and code of honor.  Scholastic dishonesty is defined as any 
act that violates the rights of another student in academic work or that involves 
misrepresentation of your own work. Scholastic dishonesty includes (but is not 
necessarily limited to): unlawfully collaborating in the preparation of assignments, 
cheating during examinations (e.g., looking at other students’ answers, bringing 
notes into the examination room), plagiarism, which means misrepresenting as 
your own work any part of work done by another. Depending on the severity 
and willfulness of the infraction, penalties could include failing the course, being 
made to repeat a course, suspension and dismissal from the University. ” .
9. POLICY OVERSIGHT IMPLEMENTATION 
The oversight implementation of the academic policies shall be the Deputy Vice 
Chancellor (Academic Affairs) assisted by the Academic Registrar.
[[page:150]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
146
GUIDELINES FOR FIELD ATTACHMENT
1.  INTRODUCTION
1.1     Definition of Field Attachment
In the context of these guidelines, filed attachment is a field-based practical 
training experience that prepares trainees for the tasks they are expected to 
perform on completion of their training. Currently field attach- ment in Makerere 
University is known by several names in different faculties and/or disciplines. 
The other names for it include: internship, school practice, Electives and 
community Based Education and Services (COBES), and industrial training. During 
consultations with the various stockholders’ , it was noted that the terminology 
“internship” which had earlier on been adopted might be confusing with respect 
to the con- ventionally and internally known post-graduate training in some 
professions, especially Human Medicine.
It was therefore agreed and recommended that for avoidance of this confusion, 
the term “Field Attach- ment” be adopted for all teaching units to mean any 
approved field based practical work carried out by staff and students for the 
purpose of teaching and / or research in places outside the University control but 
where the University is responsible for the safety of its staff, students and others 
exposed to their activities.
1.2     Objectives
The purpose of field attachments at Makerere University is to produce practically 
oriented graduates that meet the required job-related competences of their 
future employers. Additionally, it serves as a linkage between the University and 
various partners who consume services and/or products of the University. The 
specific objectives of the field attachment program are as follows:
a) To enable students get hands-on experience real-life situation they are 
expected to work in when they graduate.
b) To provide an opportunity for students to apply the principles and 
techniques theoretically learnt into real-life problem solving situations.
c) To provide an opportunity for students and academic staff to interact 
with the stakeholders and potential employers to appreciate field 
situations that will also generate information for curricula review and 
improvement
d) To develop student understanding of works ethics, employment 
demands, responsibilities and opportunities.
e) To enhance and strengthen linkages between Makerere University and 
various stakeholders.
[[page:151]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
147
1.3      Expected benefits from the field attachment
Field attachment will be implemented through partnership between the 
University and other partners who consume the University products and services. 
This partnership has three key stake holders namely: the University partners, the 
University and the students. Commitment to this partnership rests on mutual 
bene- fits for all the key partners. The expected benefits of the program for the 
different parties include:
1.3.1   University Partners
i) Will get opportunity to be involved in the training and review of 
programs at Makerere University.
ii) Will be exposed to a pool of potential employees from which 
to select. This will ultimately reduce on the costs of induction/
orientation of new employees,
iii) Will get additional human resource for effective and efficient 
service delivery.
1.3.2   Makerere University
i)      Will get opportunity to appreciate client demands and the 
quality of graduate required to fulfill these demands.
ii) As result of cooperation the potential for research will be enhanced 
and developed with the various partners,
iii)    Will get opportunity to access training facilities and resources that 
are not available at Makerere University
1.3.3   Students
1)       Will acquire new knowledge and practical experiences,
2)       Will improve their confidence in problem solving.
3)       Opportunity to relate to different categories of people likely to be met in the 
real-life situation.
4)       Will gain exposure to the demands and challenges of the work place.
5)       Will get opportunity to meet and work with potential employers.
6)       Will have improved appreciation of the profession and therefore better work 
ethics.
1.4      Roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders
If the field attachment program is to be implemented effectively and sustainably, 
the various partners have to commit themselves to specific roles and 
responsibilities. The following are the roles and responsibilities of each partner:
[[page:152]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
148
1.4.1   The University
a)     Will provide overall institutional management of the program.
b)   Shall integrate field attachment into the University curricula and have 
it reviewed periodically. 
c)     Will be responsible for the developing of a monitoring and evaluation 
criteria for field attachmentprogram including code of conduct for the 
students and staff.
d) Shall initiate partnership with relevant organizations and concretize 
this partnership with memoranda of understanding.
e) Will be responsible for identifying sites that offer valuable learning 
experiences to the students and staff.
f )     Will develop criteria/and or guidelines for selection and  training/
orientation  of  the  field supervisors.
g)   Shall build field attachment expenses in the University fees structure 
and budget. Efforts should be made to supplement the budget with 
internally and externally mobilized funds.
h)    Shall source for funding from development partners and internally to 
support implementation of the field attachment program. 
i)     Will create platforms and mechanisms for sharing experience arising 
out the field attachment program by the stakeholders.
For purposes of implementation, the University will perform its roles and 
responsibilities through the re- spective colleges/faculties/schools/institutes.
1.4.2   University Partners
i)     Shall participate in the planning, supervision and evaluation of the 
students on field attachment.
ii) Will provide on-site technical and professional guidance to the 
students on field attachment throughout the field attachment 
period.
iii)    Will provide feedback to the University on the experience of the  
field attachment program. 
iv)  Will commit their organizational facilities and/or resources for   
effective implementation of the field attachment program.
v) Will engage in a mutual learning exercise together with the 
students and staff of Makerere University.
vi)   Will provide students on field attachment with a wide range of 
experiences that go beyond technical skills.
[[page:153]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
149
vii.  Shall give accreditation and credit gains to students on field 
attachment.
1.4.3  Roles and responsibilities of students
i)    Shall take field attachment as part and parcel of their training at 
Makerere University and have positive attitude towards learning 
by practice.
ii) Shall respect all field supervisors and any other persons they 
interact with throughout their field attachment period regardless 
of their background training and social differentiation,
iii) Should work willingly wherever they are posted/attached.
iv) Should develop the day-to-day work plans with their field 
supervisors.
v) Should spend the field attachment funds in accordance with the 
budget line items. To reaffirm this, the student on field attachment 
will be required to sign a commitment form (sample in IV) before 
receiving the internship funds.
vi)   Must adhere to the field attachment code of conduct and code of 
conduct of the host organization.
vii)  Will provide reports and other forms of feedback to the University 
and the host partners.
Which may include but not limited to: - Self-evaluation, Program evaluation, 
Supervisors’ evaluation and Site evaluation. A sample format of the field 
attachment report is provided in annex III.
5.      ORGANIZATION OF THE FIELD ATTACHMENT
Field attachment shall be organized through six steps namely,
1)       Program management,
2)       Budgeting,
3)       Pre-placement,
4)       Placement,
5)       Supervision
6)       Evaluation.
[[page:154]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
150
5.1   Programme Management
5.1.1  Senate Sub-Committee
In order to make field attachment a University rather than a teaching unit affair, 
Senate sub-committeeshould be established at management level with the 
following terms of reference:
1)     To co-ordinate and harmonize the field attachment activities in all units.
2)     To review supervision, assessment and final evaluation of the field   
         attachment programs in  different teaching units periodically.
5.1.2   School committees on field attachment
At unit level, there will be a School Field Attachment Committee chaired by the 
Dean. It will comprise of the following:-
i. Dean,
ii.      Heads of departments,
iii. field attachment Co-coordinator(s),
v. One representative of the Local Governments recommended by 
the Uganda Local Authorities Association (ULAA) or any other body 
responsible for coordinating Local Governments,
vi. One representative of the private sector,
vii. One representative of the line ministry, and one representative of any 
other key stakeholder as each faculty deems necessary.
The terms of reference of the unit level committee shall 
include:
i)        To carry out budgeting for field attachment and/or
ii)       To assist the University in identifying funding sources, 
iii)      To Review placement and supervision procedures
iv)      To handle assessment and the final evaluation of field attachment 
v)       To mainstream field attachment in the academic programs.
5.1.3   Budget
The sponsors of Students and the University should consider field attachment 
program as a priority academ- ic activity. The following are recommendations on 
sustainability measures: -
1) Uganda government should show commitment by giving the necessary 
financial support to field attachment.
2) The University should be cost Field attachment program and the fees passed 
over to the benefactors of the students. The tuition fees whether government
[[page:155]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
151
or privately sponsored should have the field attachment component.
3) Teaching units should form partnership with the districts and private sector and 
negotiate how best the partners can support the field attachment program. 
The teaching units should endevour to source for additional resources from 
development partners to support the field attachment program.
4) In addition to supporting the field attachment programs directly, government 
and development partners should support participating institutions to offer 
field attachment to students.
5) On-site supervisors should be recognized and motivated through appropriate 
means such as payment of honorarium and/or a letter of recognition.
6)       Each unit will have an annual field attachment budget with the following line 
items:
i) Students’ maintenance.
ii)     Student’s materials and equipment.
iii)   Planning and preparation for students’ placement and supervision. 
a)   Meetings.
b)   Transport.
c)   Subsistence.
d)   Communication. 
e)   Stationery.
f )   Academic supervision. 
g)   Transport
h)   Subsistence
i)    Communications 
6.  FACILITATION FOR ON-SITE SUPERVISION
6.1      Coordination expenses
6.1.1   Pre-placement
This activity consists of three tasks namely; visits to field attachment areas and 
joint planning, briefing students and re-orientating the academic staff.
6.1.2   Visits to field attachment sites and joint planning with the partners
The purpose of the visits is to identify partners/sites and negotiate relationships, 
roles and responsibilities. The visits should be followed by prior exchange 
communication with the partners to confirm appointment. Academic staff  
together with the partners should identify suitable sites for students’ attachment. 
Criteria for site selection should be as follows
[[page:156]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
152
i)        Availability of suitable field supervisor(s).
ii)       Availability of supportive facilities to the learning of the student(s).
iii)      Availability of on-going activities to provide learning experiences to  
the student(s). 
iv)      Gender needs.
v)       Health and safety of the site.
Joint planning should include drawing an action plan for implementation of the 
program; agree on the eval- uation criteria of the students on field attachment 
and modalities for supervision. It also involves training of the field supervisors 
in specific requirements for supervision and evaluation of the students on field 
attach- ment. This activity should be carried out during the break between 
semester I and II.
6.1.3   Briefing of the students
Before the placement, students should be briefed a week before they do the end 
of Semester II examination, so that they can appreciate field attachment as an 
integral part of their training programs. In such briefing, the following areas shall 
be addressed:
i)        The purpose of the field attachment program.
ii)       Basic requirements in terms of equipment and materials.
iii)      Code of conduct expected of the students during the field attachment 
iv)      Roles of the various supervisors (academic and field supervisors)
v)       Grading/evaluation of the field attachment program
vi)      Various channels of communication for students on field attachments e.g. 
where and how to report when they have problems.
vii)     The final field attachment report format.
viii)    When and how to hand over materials/equipment lent to them (by) the 
host organization) during field attachment.
ix)      Other matters concerning their welfare during the field attachment
x)       Health and safety issues
6.1.4   Re-orientation of the academic staff
Since all the academic staff will participate in supervision of the students on field 
attachment, they should all be involved in the planning and organization of the 
exercise. They should be well re-oriented on the following-
i)    The purpose of the field attachment program
ii)    What the task involves
iii)   Development and review of the monitoring and evaluation/assessment 
criteria.
[[page:157]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
153
This activity should be carried out before the visits to the internship sites. This 
is because some of the staff will be involved in the pre-placement preparations.
7.1      Placement 
7.1.1   Duration and Timing
The year of study that students will go for field attachment depends on the design 
of the academic program. Cognizant of the cost of the field attachment program, 
it is however preferable those students have field attachment at least twice but 
not more than thrice during their training at the University. this is considered to be 
the adequate period for students to have a first experience, conceptualize those 
experiences in their training and try out what they have learnt in another way (in 
the second field attachment).
It is recommended that all other teaching units conduct their field attachment at 
the end of the second semester and each period of field attachment should last at 
least eight (8) weeks per year.
7.1.2   Posting
The process of posting students on field attachment will include:
i)        Identifying suitable candidates for each site.
ii)    Preparing letters of introduction and other necessary documents e.g. 
guidelines for fieldattachment report writing, students’ evaluation forms, 
log books and journals.
iii) Payment of students’ field attachment logistical and financial support, 
which should be harmonized with the time of posting. The payment of 
student allowances should be done not more than one week before their 
date of reporting for the field attachment.
7.1.3     Students’ records
Student on field attachment will be required to keep notebook (or log book) where 
they will enter their daily records of the activities they are engaged in as well as 
new knowledge and innovations learnt. A sample of the logbook can be obtained 
from the Lecturer concerned. The on-site supervisor shall assess the daily records 
in the logbook. In addition, the interns’ logbooks shall be assessed and signed by 
the academic su- pervisors each time they visit the student (s) in the field.
At the end of the field attachment period, the student shall produce a report 
of their field attachment experi- ences based on guidelines as developed by 
respectives Schools or Academic Units.
All University policies and procedures apply throughout the duration of the field 
work. It is the Field Work Supervisor’s responsibility to ensure that people involved
[[page:158]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
154
in the field work are aware of all relevant policies The University shall develop 
suitable penalties for students who do not comply with the guidelines.
8. S UPERVISION
i)    There will be two distinct levels of supervision: site level day-to-day 
supervision by the field supervisor and the academic supervisor 
from the University.
ii) Each site/student will be visited at least three times by the 
academic supervisors, each visit lasting 2-3 days or more like in the 
case of School of Education.
iii) During the visit, the academic supervisor will interact with the 
student on field attachment, field supervisor /other relevant 
officials and also visit the attachment sites to acquaint himself/ 
herself with the activities of the student.
8.1  Requirements for on-Site and Academic Supervisors
The on-site and academic supervisors need to meet the following requirements.
8.1.1   On-site supervisors
On-site supervisor’s will:
i)         Be persons with relevant practical experience.
ii)    Show willingness to have regular contact with the student on field 
attachment.
iii)      Have reasonable ethical and professional conduct.
iv)    Be willing to engage in a learning experience with the student on field 
attachment.
8.1.2   Academic supervisors
i)     Supervision will be done by qualified academic staff i.e. assistant 
lecturer and above.
ii)   Schedules of the academic supervisors will be communicated to 
the partners and or field supervisors in advance.
iii)  The supervision reports will be written on the spot and copies 
given  to the student and the field attachment coordinator.
iv)   The University shall develop penalties for academic supervisors 
whose performance in the field will be found to be wanting or in 
breach of professional conduct.
[[page:159]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
155
EVALUATION
i) Given the duration and intensity of the field attachment program 
and the rigor of assessment (by field supervisor, academic 
supervisor, field attachment report), the internship should carry 
an overall weighting of 5.0 credit units
ii)  The field attachment, being part and parcel of the academic 
program, must be assessed, graded and the grades should 
contribute towards the award of a candidate.
iii) The field attachment grades should appear on the student 
transcript as an independent course.
9.1      Students’ Assessment
Marks for the field attachment performance will be distributed between 
assessment by the on-site supervi- sor, academic supervisor and field attachment 
report. In view of the purpose of the field attachment program as providing 
practical orientation, the assessment by the on-site-supervisor, who is best placed 
to monitor and assess the student daily performance, should be given prominence 
in proportion distribution.   The marks for field attachments be distributed as 
follows;
i)        Assessment by the on-site field supervisor based on agreed criteria will 
carry not more than 40% (see sample assessment form in annex I).
ii) Assessment by the academic supervisor will carry a maximum of 60%, 
based on criteria determined by the responsible teaching units.
9.2      Overall evaluation
For continued partnership Academic supervisors should evaluate the field attach-
ment program annually based on:     Supervision
[[page:160]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
156
 GUIDELINES FOR GRADUATION   
CEREMONIES
A       General guidelines
1.     That there should be one “Graduation Week” every 
academic year to be located during theJanuary 
Vacation.
2. That the Graduate students should have a 
separate, multi-disciplinary graduation ceremony 
from the undergraduate students.
3. That the Chancellor should open the “Graduation 
Week” by presiding over the ceremony of 
Graduate students and the graduation week 
would be closed by the Chancellor or his/her 
representative.
4. That the graduation ceremonies shall have one 
graduation number during that week and that 
on each day after the conferment of awards 
the Chancellor or his/her representative would 
adjourn the ceremony until the graduation week 
was closed. The congregation would be dissolved 
on  the last day of the graduation week.
5. That the Chancellor or his/her representative 
should give the Vice Chancellors awards or any 
other awards to person(s) being honoured.
6. That undergraduate students would graduate 
according to their programmes on a scheduled
[[page:161]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
157
day and time during the “Graduation Week” . 
Programmes that were related and had small 
numbers of students would combine their 
ceremonies.
7. That the Vice-Chancellor or his/her Deputies 
should preside over the undergraduate cere- 
monies and confer degrees/award Diplomas.
8. That all graduation ceremonies shall take place at 
the University or at such other venue as may be 
agreed upon by the University Senate.
9. That there should be a Chancellor’s procession 
during the first graduation ceremony for graduate 
students.
10.    That in the decentralised Units, there should 
be a procession of Principals, Deans, Heads of 
Department, Academic Staff and invited guests, 
led by the Vice Chancellor (or Deputy Vice-
Chancellor Academic Affairs).
11.   The Academic Registrar’s Department should fully 
cover the decentralised graduation budgets.
12.   Since few graduands would attend at a time, there 
should be no need to disrupt traffic around the 
Makerere University environments.
13.    That the list of the graduates should be published 
on the Makerere University website.
[[page:162]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
158
B.      Guidelines on management, administration and 
coordination
1. That the Ceremonies Secretariat be strengthened in order to adequately 
handle decentralized graduations and other ceremonies. That, a Senate 
Committee on ceremonies be set up. This Committee should be responsible 
for:
i) Drawing out the schedules for all graduation ceremonies for a given 
academic year.
ii) Arranging to publish one graduation booklet for all graduate and 
undergraduate students graduating in the “Graduation Week” . The format 
of the booklet should be similar to the ones currently being printed in the 
centralised graduation system.
iii)      Arrange to issue invitation cards to graduands and their guests in 
collaboration with the Academic Registrar.
iv)      Coordinating the parking and directing of guests to the graduation 
venue in collaboration with the relevant security officials.
v)      Arrange the issuing of gowns and other graduation regalia.
vi)     Arrange the issuing of passes to accredited professional photographers 
who will be at different sites.
vii) Take care of security matters in collaboration with Makerere University 
Security Depart- ment and Makerere University Police Post.
viii)   Provide first aid stations at the graduation location in collaboration with 
Makerere Uni- versity Hospital.
ix)    Deal with media coverage.
x)      Offer any assistance that may be required by the Academic Units.
2. That there should be Schools/Colleges Ceremonies Committees (Unit 
Ceremonies Commit- tees) which would liaise with the Senate Committee on 
Ceremonies and Academic Registrar.
3. That in order to ensure uniformity of graduation gowns the University 
Procurement and Dis- posal Units should pre-qualify up to four (4) Tailoring 
firms (tailors) to handle the making and issuing of Gowns on behalf of the 
University.
4. That there should be an option for hiring the gowns if a student does not 
want to buy. Two separate fees (for hiring and owning gowns) should be 
clearly communicated. That the University shall be involved in fixing the price 
of Gowns and that the pre-qualified firms should have a provision for hire and 
purchase of Gowns by Graduands.
5. That the Academic Registrar office in conjunction with the Vice Chancellor 
office would publish newsletters for each graduation week. The Newsletters 
would include, inter alia, the Chancellor’s and Vice Chancellor’s speeches,
[[page:163]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
159
news from Academic Units, and any other supplement.
6. That no graduation ceremony should last more than 3 hours, and the number 
of people graduating at any one ceremony should be approximately range of 
400 to 1,500.
7.      Examination results for students graduating should be published and 
submitted to the Academic Registrar’s office eight (8) weeks before the 
graduation ceremony.
8.      That a student should register to graduate eight (8) weeks before the 
ceremony by filling in appropriate form and clearing with all the relevant 
centres in the university.
C.        Entertainment
1. That the Units, in liaison with the Academic Registrar should organise their 
programme and entertainment for the graduation day.
2.      That the ceremonies Committee shall organise and coordinate entertainment.
3. That both the National Anthem and Makerere Anthem should be sung by 
students of Music, Dance & Drama at all the graduation ceremonies.
4.      That Convocation shall be required to respond to the new structure.
D.       The ceremony of conferment of degrees/diplomas
1.      Each School/College should issue a certificate of recognition to their best 
student during the ceremony, including graduate students.
2. That Schools/Colleges with small numbers should be free to group together 
for purposes of organizing graduation ceremonies.
3. That the Units may invite their own Guest Speaker and select the theme of 
the speech, but the Vice Chancellor or Deputy Vice-Chancellor should confer 
the degree and award of diplomas as per the Universities & Other Tertiary 
Institutions Act (2001).
4.      That the student with the highest CGPA for each Programme will have his/
her name read out and they would come forward to receive a certificate of 
recognition.
5. That the Convocation Awards shall continue to be given to the overall 
best Science and Hu- manities students. Such award shall be announced 
at the opening of the Graduation Ceremony week and at the respective 
decentralised ceremonies where the candidates graduate.
6.      That the best graduate student should be recognised at the graduation 
ceremony.
[[page:164]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
160
E.       Alumni
1.      Alumni from various Colleges may organize reunions at decentralised 
graduation ceremonies. This would facilitate Units and the University at large 
to strategically tap alumni finances in supporting the activities and plans of 
specific units.
2. The university would further cultivate the culture of alumni participation and 
giving through the introduction of prestigious and inspirational speeches by 
alumni and students. For example, a “chief orator” by a selected alumnus and 
/or “student oration” delivered by a non-graduating student.
[[page:165]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
161
A STATUTE ON HONORARY AWARDS 
GUIDELINES
1. In accordance with the provisions of Section 47 of the University and other 
tertiary institutions Act 2001.
i) The University may consider conferring an Honorary or Title upon any 
person who has ex- celled in any sector of life as it may deem fit on the 
recommendation of an Honorary Degrees Committee established jointly 
by the Senate and the University Council.
ii) Proposal to grant Honorary Degree or any other award may be made by 
a member of the Uni- versity Community and shall be communicated in 
writing to the Vice-Chancellor.
iii)   Every such proposal shall be accompanied by detailed curriculum vitae, 
a statement setting forth the award recommended and the detailed 
grounds on which the recommendation is based. No proposal will be 
received without these details.
2. The Vice-Chancellor shall refer such proposals initially to the appropriate 
College Academic Boards and then submit their decisions to the Honorary 
Awards Committee consisting of the following persons: 
a)      Membership
i)      Chairperson: Vice-Chancellor
ii) Members:  The Chairperson of University Council, Deputy Vice-
Chancellors, University Secretary, three members of the University 
Council elected by the Council and Three members of Senate elected by 
the Senate
iii)    Secretary: The Academic Registrar 
b) Terms of Reference:
i) To Receive and Consider nominations from the various College  Academic 
Boards of Honorary Degrees and Fellowships.
ii)     To forward the approved nominations for balloting by the members of 
the Senate and Council.
3. Any recommendations made by this Committee for the conferring of 
honorary Awards shall be subject to the following procedures and rules;
a) The Senate shall make its decision through a secret ballot vote on the 
recommendations at the sitting of the Senate. The ballot papers shall 
be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds upon which 
the recommendation is based.
b) Any recommendation which secures a majority of the total
[[page:166]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
162
number of members of the Senate shall also through a ballot and 
accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds upon which 
the recommendations are based be submitted to Council. The majority 
of the total number of members of the Council shall be required for a 
decision to confer an Honorary Degree or Award.
c) The final decision of Council will be announced at the separate 
meetings of Senate and Council.
d) The proceedings with regard to Honorary Awards shall be conducted 
in the strictest secrecy and no consultation shall at any time be made 
with the potential candidate except by the Vice-Chancellor or in his/
her absence by the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic Affairs).
e) The Honorary Awards should be sparingly made and in any case not 
more than three will be awarded in any given academic year.
f )     If a recommendation or recommendations of the Committee are 
rejected by the Council and Senate such a nomination shall not be 
considered again until a period of five years.
g) The awards of Honorary Degrees must be “in presentia” except in very 
exceptional circumstances when a special resolution of Council on 
the recommendation of Senate will be required for presentation “in 
absentia” or “posthumously” .
h) Except in very special circumstances the Committee will not consider 
any nomination of any officer in the service of the University or any 
person currently in the employment of the University.
i) The Honorary Degree Awards shall be Doctor of Science (DSc.) for 
academic contribution in the field of Science, Doctor of Letters (D.Litt) 
for academic contribution in the Humanities and Doctor of Laws (LL.D) 
for Public Service by eminent statesmen, administrators and lawyers. 
The Degrees of Master and Doctor of Philosophy shall not be awarded 
Honoris Causa.
[[page:167]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
163
POLICY ON JOINT AWARDS BETWEEN 
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY AND OTHER 
INSTITUTION
a)         Collaborating institutions
i)      Collaboration can only be made with recognized institutions.
ii) There shall exist structures and expertise to manage, teach, supervise, 
examine and carry out research for the Joint Award. 
iii)    Ethical issues related to the award shall be noted and agreed upon jointly 
by either University/ Institution.
iv)    The students and staff involved shall be made aware of the Joint Award 
procedure in print, electronic form and visitations by relevant authorities 
from the Universities.
b)        Agreement
There shall exist a collaborative agreement to justify and strengthen the 
complementary and equal partnership between universities.
c)        Funding Mechanism
There shall exist and enabling funding mechanism to operationalise the joint 
award.
d)      Intellectual Property Rights
Intellectual Property Rights shall belong to the partner Universities and the details 
of sharing financial proceeds shall be worked out as applicable in each University, 
following a mutual agreed format.
e)        Admission Requirement
The admission requirements of the relevant institution shall be equivalent and 
any modifications/additions to such qualifications shall be mutually agreed.
f)        Application Requirements and Procedure of Application
i)     That the application requirements of the relevant institution shall be 
equivalent and any modifications/additions to such qualifications shall 
be mutually agreed upon.
ii) The programme shall be openly advertised for equal opportunity for 
candidates to apply and information given to staff to appreciate as they
[[page:168]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
164
participate. Standing should be put in place for any given Joint Award 
Programme.
g)      Duration of Study and Residence
The duration of study shall be defined but it should not significantly differ from 
the existing ones in participating universities. Duration of stay in a particular 
university shall be prescribed as a requirement before the award is given.
h)       Fees Payment and Sharing of Fees between Collaborating 
institutions
The mode of fees payment and sharing shall be established between the partner 
universities/institutions.
i)        Coordinating Office
The University organs to manage and coordinate the Award must be clearly 
identified in each University and a Coordinator shall be identified.
j)        Course and Coursework Load
The type of course and coursework required by the collaborating Universities 
towards the awards shall be defined.
k)       Quality Assurance
The methods of progress monitoring shall be agreed upon using the existing 
methods from either University.
l) The examination process and grading of the award shall be agreed upon 
by both Universities but shall not be significantly different from the existing ones 
at either University.
m)     Format of dissertation
The format of results presentation in case of research project of dissertation 
presentations shall be agreed upon to include a comprehensive monograph 
and peer-reviewed published scientific articles (the acceptable number shall be 
defined).
n)       Withdrawal of Students
Mechanism of withdrawal from the Joint Award shall be granted only following 
an investigation.
[[page:169]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
165
o)        Transcripts
Documentation of results shall be through existing transcripts, which would 
be accepted by the partner Universities with the words “Transcript for the Joint 
Award” included in the document.
p)        Award Certificate
i) The name of the award must be in existence at either University or 
both official languages be used in the Award Certificate as agreed 
upon.
ii) The Joint Award Certificate shall bear both/all Universities logos 
side by side, a statement attributed to the awarding bodies in 
the partner Universities, title of the degree (class if applicable), 
candidates name, date of award and signature of the relevant 
University authorities, Quality of paper used shall be agreed upon 
and relevant University seals embossed.
q)      Arbitration
i) Special situation shall be resolved by consultation of bodies responsible 
for the joint Awards in the partner Universities.
ii)     The agreement shall provide for the appointment of Arbitrator or 
Arbitrators. 
iii)    Termination of the Joint Award
The termination of the Join Award Programme by any of the Universities shall 
be by one years notice with mutual consent, but shall not affect the registered 
students until their studies have been completed or until deregistered.
[[page:170]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
166
STATUTE FOR THE GOVERNANCE OF 
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY DEGREES 
AND OTHER AWARDS AT AFFILIATED 
INSTITUTIONS
STATUTE X1-a
1. Under Sections 71 (1), (2) and (3) of the of the Universities and Other Tertiary 
Institution Act (2001) as amended 2003 and as amended in, 2006, this statute 
is hereby made to provide for award of degrees, dip1omas and certificates to 
students registered at designated affiliated instituitions.
2.      A tertiary institution may, for the purpose of promoting its academic 
programmes, and with the approval of the National Council, affiliate with 
Makerere University if:
a) the institutional standards governing the performance, operations 
and conduct of the institution are acceptable to the University Council.
b)       its institutional standards conform to the standards set by the National 
Council for Higher Education.
3.      An affiliated College, School or Tertiary Institution shall remain so under the 
Act and as such, for all intents and purposes shall –
a) Retain its status, administration and organizational structure as they 
were before affiliation; and
b) Be independent of the University to which it is affiliated and only 
depend on the University to the extent agreed upon; in conformity 
with this Act, regulations made there under and Statutes made and 
guidelines issued by the University relating to institutions affiliated to 
it.
4. A College, School or Tertiary Institution affiliated to a University shall, as 
may be agreed in relation to awards, conduct courses leading to awards of 
certificates, diplomas or degrees of that University under standards provided 
under this Act and Statutes made and guidelines issued by the University and 
shall in connection with the relevant awards, jointly conduct examinations 
leading to those awards. 
5. An institution may, on a written application addressed to the Academic 
Registrar be admitted, by statatute, to the status of a connected institution 
by the council upon the recommendation of the Senate.
6.     The statute made by the Council shall;
a)       Specify,
i) The course or courses that may be pursued, under admission
[[page:171]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
167
requirements, regulations and syllabuses approved by the Senate, at the 
connected institution and, leading to the award of the University,
ii)     The fees chargeable for registration, examination, graduation and other 
purposes.
iii)    The privileges, if any, that students and staff of the connected institution 
may be entitled to;
b) Provide for the representation of the University on the academic 
organ of the connected institution provided that ‘the expenses of 
such representation shall be borne by the connected institutions,
7. The Senate, before making a recommendation to the council under section 
(5) of this statute shall satisfy itself,
a) That a Faculty or Institute or School in the University is in a position 
to administer, in like manner as the internal awards, the external 
award or awards of the University for which the connection is 
sought,
b) That the institution enjoys a reputable educational standard for the 
purpose of teaching for an award or awards of the University,
c) That the institution is established on a permanent basis under the 
laws of the country in which it is situated, and.
d) That the members of staff who are designated to teach courses 
for awards of the University have the academic stature and 
qualifications which are acceptable to the University and. have 
reached such a standard as would be required for teachers of the 
University.
8. The University may require that an initial visitation by its representatives be 
made to such an institu- tion to satisfy itself on library facilities adequacy of’ 
staff, lecture rooms and thereafter visitations shall be undertaken as shall be 
provided for in the statute of connection.
TERMS AND MODE OF AFFILIATION
1) The affiliation of the Institution with the University shall be effected through 
the relevant College or School of Makerere University. Accordingly, the 
College Academic Board of the designated College shall receive from the 
Institution any submissions relating to the course of study at the Institution 
leading to the award of the University and shall recommend thereon to the 
Senate.
2) Studies leading to the award of the Makerere University, may be pursued at 
the Institution under regulations governing admission, curriculum of study, 
syllabuses and examinations, which shall be prescribed by the Senate.
3) The fees chargeable for registration, examination, graduation and other
[[page:172]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
168
purposes shall be determined from time to time by the Council.
4) The Senate shall appoint one member of the University as its representative 
on the Board of Governors/Governing Councils of the Institution. The 
Institution shall bear the expenses of such representation.
5) The Institution may appoint one person as its representative on the College 
Academic Board of the College and shall meet the expenses of such 
representation.
6)     The Senate may designate such staff of the Institution as are qualified and 
are directly involved in teaching the course leading to the award of the 
University, as 
a) Honorary Lecturers or
b)    Honorary Assistant Lecturers of the University as the case may be.
7)     The students of the Institution who are registered for the course leading to 
the award of the University shall be regarded as Associate members of the 
Students’Association of the University.
8) The Senate shall not less than once every five years, cause a visitation to 
be made by its representaties to the College to determine the continued 
adequacy or otherwise of,
a)    Library facilities;
b)    Lecture rooms;
c)    Laboratories; and Staff.
9)     The expenses of any such visitation shall be borne by the Affiliated College/
Institute.
AFFILIATION FEE POLICY 
1.      BACKGROUND
Section 41 (d), 71 and 72 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 
2001 as amended by Act No. 7 of 2003 provides for Statute XI – a: Statute for 
the Regulation of Makerere University Degrees and Other Awards at Affiliated 
Institutions.
Statute XI –a, gives guidelines for the award of degrees, diplomas and certificates 
to students registered at designated affiliated institutions.
2.  AFFILIATED INSTITUTIONS
By 2024, fifteen (15) Institutions were affiliated to Makerere University and these 
are:
[[page:173]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
169
1.      Makerere University Business School (MUBS)
2.      National Major Seminary, Kinyamasika
3.      National Major Seminary, Katigondo
4.      National Major Seminary, Ggaba
5.      National Major Seminary, Alokolum
6.      Health Tutors College, Mulago
7.      Uganda Institute of Bankers
8.      Nsamizi Training Institute of Social Development
9.      Sheikh Technical Veterinary School (STVS) – Somaliland
10.    Hospice Uganda
11.    Senior Staff Command College, Kimaka (SSCK)
12.    Public Health Nurses College, Kyambogo
13.  Uganda Military Academy, Kabamba (UMAK)
14.  National Defence College- Uganda (NDC-U)
15.  Police Senior Command and Staff College-Bwebajja (PSCSC)
Although Statute XI – a 2(a, (ii) stipulates that fees chargeable for registration, 
examination, graduation andother purposes will be specified, there is no written 
guideline on payment of fees by affiliated institutions.
At a meeting held between Makerere University Business School (MUBS) and 
School of Postgraduate Studies on 13th January, 2010 an understanding on sharing 
resources was reached and percentages made for registration, examination, 
administration etc.
These percentages are being used for Makerere University Business School 
(MUBS) students and other affiliated institutions, but they need to be harmonized 
to include the current fee of endowment fund and affiliation fee.
3.  FUNCTIONS HANDLED
a)        Application and admission 
Application and admission is a central and key role of Makerere University, although 
some Institutions like MUBS carry out GMAT tests for Masters Programmes. 
Makerere University advertises; receives all applications and admits all students 
from affiliated institutions.
b)        Registration
Registration is one of the shared key functions between Makerere University and 
the affiliated Institutes. The activities involved under registration include:
[[page:174]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
170
i)        Manual checking of academic documents; 
ii)       Issuing of print outs and report generation; 
iii)      Data Entry;
iv)      General Maintenance of the system; and
v)       Training and facilitation of registrars
Therefore, registration of students is a shared function.
c)          Examination
Examination is a core function of the University, though shared. This includes:
i)        Time tabling;
ii)       Procurement of examination answer booklets;
iii)      Administering of examinations;
iv)      Stationery;
v)       Overseeing examinations;
vi)      Storage;
(vii)   Postage and external examination of graduate dissertations and Thesis 
Examination is a shared function. For Makerere University Business 
School (MUBS) however, almost everything is done at the School.
d)      Identity Cards
Identity cards are procured, processed and issued by Makerere University.
4.  AFFILIATION FEE
Affiliation fee will be part of the functional fees paid only by students from affiliated 
institutions. An affil- iation fee of Ug. Shs. 20,000= (twenty thousand shillings only) 
will be paid by each student per annum for Ugandans and East African students; 
and Ug. shs. 40,000= (forty thousand shillings) for other nationals.
Justification of the affiliation fee and other functional fees
• Instit utions that affiliate to Makerere University have their programmes 
assessed, discussed and approved by Makerere University organs. 
Administratively, there is a cost that Makerere University incurs.
•      There is need to have continuous monitoring and periodic visitations to assess 
the teaching at affiliated institutions. These visits can only be facilitated by the 
affiliation fees.
• Makerere University is a brand name which many people would want to 
associate with, being the best in East Africa and among the five top Universities 
in Africa. Therefore, it is costly to keep the brand name in terms of monitoring
[[page:175]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
171
and quality assurance.
•      The quality of Academic qualification that Makerere offers is highly valued.
• Whereas Makerere University shares functional fees with affiliated Institutions, 
these institutions take all the tuition.
•      Affiliated institutions can top up on functional fees according to their needs
• Makerere University Business School (MUBS) is a Constituent College of 
Makerere Univer- sity and hence slightly different from the other affiliated 
institutions. For example; MUBS reports directly to the Senate and Makerere 
University Council, it does not go through a college to approve their results; 
all their examination and results are handled at MUBS from moderation; to 
purchasing examination booklets to approving them. 
4.1     Guidelines
i) The affiliation fee will be part of the functional fees and students from 
affiliated institutions will be paying the same amount of functional fees 
like Makerere University students (main campus) except MUBS students 
who will continue paying in percentages because of the uniqueness 
explained in (iii) above.
ii)  All functional fees must be paid by all students from affiliated Institutions 
including students from MUBS directly to Makerere University Council.
5.      APPROVED FUNCTIONAL FEES
5.1     All Students from Affiliated institutions except MUBS
a)         Undergraduate Students
ITEMS UGANDANS OTHER NATIONALS
(a) Application 50,000/= US.$75 (where applicable)
(b) Registration 100,000/= 202,000/= per annum
(c) Examination 100,000/= 303,000/= per annum
(d) Technology 50,000/= 101,000/=  per annum
(e) Identity Card 15,000/= 40,400/=
(f ) Endowment 10,000/= 10,000/= per annum
(g) Affiliation 20,000/= 40,000/=per annum
Graduate Students
ITEMS UGANDANS OTHER NATIONALS
(a) Application 50,000/= 151,500/=
(b) Registration 120,000=/= 202,000/=
(c) Examination(Diploma and Masters) 200,000/= 707,000/=
[[page:176]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
172
(d) Examination(PhD) 300,000= 1, 010,000=
(e) Administration 200,000/= 484,800/=
(f ) Identity Card 15,000/= 40,400/=
(g) Endowment 10,000/= 10,000/= per annum
(h) Affiliation 20,000/= 40,000/=per annum
5.2     Makerere University Business School (MUBS)
Students from Makerere University Business School (MUBS) will continue 
paying functional fees in the following percentages direct to 
Makerere University Council:
SN FUNCTIONAL FEE PERCENTAGE
(a) Application   100%
(b) Registration 55%
(c) Examination 25%
(d) Administration 50%
(e) Identity Card 100%
(f ) Technology 50%
(g) Endowment 100%
(h) Affiliation 100%
Graduate Student
ITEMS UGANDANS OTHER NATIONALS
(a) Application 50,000/= 151,500/=
(b) Registration 66,000/= 111,100/=
(c) Examination Masters & 
Diploma PhD
50,000/=
75,000/=
176,750/=
252,500/=
(d) Administration 100,000/= 242,400/=
(e) Identity Card 15,000/= 40,400/=
(g) Endowment 10,000/= 10,000/= per annum
(h) Affiliation 20,000/= 40,000/=per annum
Undergraduate Students
[[page:177]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
173
ITEMS UGANDANS OTHER NATIONALS
(a) Application 50,000/= US. $ 75 (where applicable)
(b) Registration 50,000/= 101,000/= per annum
(c) Examination 50,000/= 151,500/= per annum
(d) Technology 25,000/= 50,000/=  per annum
(e) Identity Card 15,000/= 40,400/=
(f ) Endowment 10,000/= 10,000/= per annum
(g) Affiliation 20,000/= 40,000/=per annum
[[page:178]]
MAKERERE UNIVERSITY POLICIES
174