[[page:1]]
Policy on remarking students’ work 
 
Guidelines for handling students who are dissatisfied with their marks are as follows: 
1 A candidate wishing to make any appeal against his/her ex amination results shall do so 
within 30 days from the date of publication of the final results. 
2 All appeals for re-marking shall be addressed to the chairperson of the 
Faculty/Institute/School Examinations Committee and a copy given to the Lecturer 
concerned. 
3 Candidates shall make their requests in wr iting clearly specifyi ng the grounds upon which 
the appeal is being made including, but not limited to the following: 
a) Miscomputation of Marks 
b) Bias on the part of the Lecturer 
c) Marks generally out of step with one’s over-all performance. 
4 The Faculty/Institute/School Examinations comm ittee shall communicate its decisions to the 
affected student within a period of 14 days of its deliberations. 
5 From the time the decision to remark is made  by the Faculty/Institu te/School Examinations 
committee, remarking shall be completed within two weeks and the new mark awarded shall 
be approved by the Dean of behalf of the Faculty/Institute/Schools Board of Studies. 
6 If a candidate decides to withdraw his/her a ppeal before it is considered by the Committee, 
such withdrawal shall be done in writing. 
 
Policy on Retention and Disposition of Examination Scripts 
 
Due to lack of space for storing large volumes of scripts, the Senate has decided on the following 
measures in handling examination scripts:  
i) The Academic Units shall store/retain all assessment examination scripts of students for a 
period of two years with effect from the end of the semester of a particular assessment. This 
retention shall allow the University to address any complaints or appeals and also to use the 
scripts for Quality Assurance purposes.   
ii) It is the responsibility of each  Dean/Director to ensure that Examination Scripts are disposed 
off in a secure and appropriate manner at the end of the defined period (two years from the 
semester of a particular assessment). 
iii) Academic Units shall ensure prompt return  of course work scripts/assignments/ class 
 tests at least not later than two weeks be fore the beginning  of the semester Final  
 Examinations to enable students to know  their progress and/or learn from past 
 mistakes.